This fall, the Trump administration found its new favorite nondenial denial. When a reporter asked the embattled Secretary of State Rex Tillerson about a rumor that he had called the president a “moron” back in July, he replied, “I’m not going to deal with petty stuff like that.” When the White House press secretary, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, was asked to comment on political criticism from the Republican senators Bob Corker and Jeff Flake, she dismissed their criticism as “petty comments.” In an Oct. 5 briefing, she brushed off the “moron” story as a “petty, ridiculous accusation” after chastising the media for spending only “5 percent of your time” on “big issues” and filling the rest with “petty palace intrigue.”
Never mind that the Trump administration is normally eager to litigate everything from whether the president owns a bathrobe to the size of his inauguration crowds, or that Sanders herself is the reigning queen of what The New Yorker’s Masha Gessen recently called “the petty power struggle” — the art of belittling questions so thoroughly that press briefings come and go with no actual information dispersed. This is the projection presidency, the “I’m rubber, you’re glue” administration. Its deployment of “petty” as a weapon is particularly canny because it parrots a legitimate strain of press criticism, one that warns reporters against getting sidetracked by meaningless White House spectacles. But at the same time that Sanders is acting appalled by correspondents’ questions, the president’s own petty grievances are working overtime to lure us to national distraction. His recent Twitter rebuke of Time magazine — a “you can’t fire me because I quit” move, in which he claimed to have turned down a potential “Person of the Year” designation — set off an entire trivial news cycle that pushed aside more quotidian political news, like updates on tax-bill negotiations.
It would be easy to assume, surveying the national scene, that pettiness is universally regarded as a bad thing. But in other corners of the culture, it’s experiencing a kind of renaissance. On black Twitter, a certain brand of pettiness — the kind that involves gleefully asserting yourself over the smallest points and meticulously cataloging and avenging the tiniest of slights — is celebrated as a virtue and a skill, the comedic equivalent of possessing strong attention to detail. It’s celebrated in display-name puns — Petty Boop, Petty Labelle, Petty Images — and circulated in animated GIFs cut from reality-TV shows. The black entertainment blog Bossip is hot on the petty beat, publishing lists like “The Pettiest Celebrities in the Game” and curating the highlights of #PettyTwitter. The trend has even been converted into product, with Forever 21 selling a satin baseball cap inscribed with the word PETTY.
Here, the truly petty person becomes a kind of superhero: She’s focused, exacting, unwilling to suffer fools (or literally anything else) gladly. She is an everyday person who treats everything that relates to her as incredibly consequential. If you happen to be the president, of course, the smallest events of your life are already of great consequence — as are your pettiest reactions to them. Trump’s impulse to publicly dunk on Time magazine, when aimed at Kim Jong-un, also has the power to nudge the doomsday clock closer to nuclear holocaust. The context of Tillerson’s insult wasn’t a small thing, either: According to NBC News, it came after a situation-room meeting in which the president was said to be so flippant, about such serious geopolitical issues, that one anonymous adviser told a reporter, “Maybe we need to slow down a little and explain the whole world” — to the president of the United States. The value of sweating the small stuff, it turns out, depends quite a lot on how much power you have to affect the big stuff.
“Petty” literally means “small.” It evolved from the French petit in the late 14th century. A century later, it had curdled into a belittling insult, referring to issues of “small importance” or to “small minded” people. To call other people petty can be to reduce them, and swat them away. It can also be a way to make yourself large, staking your claim to a plane of existence far above such irrelevant nonsense. “Petty” can describe the nonsense, but it can also describe the kind of person who is constantly stooping to engage with it, often transparently in the service of his own ego. “Petty” is both the trifling junk and the person who can’t resist dealing in it.
Ancient Chinese texts drew a class distinction between the junzi, the aristocratic gentlemen, and the xiaoren, the common men — poor, unskilled and, supposedly, stupid and immoral. Western translators quickly found the perfect Romance-language equivalent: the “petty man.” And 19th-century Marxists made a distinction between the bourgeoisie and the “petite” or “petty bourgeoisie” class beneath it — not just merchants and small-business owners but also all the workers, like foremen and supervisors, who have day-to-day control over means of production they don’t actually own. Kierkegaard extrapolated a spiritual failing from that class position: “Devoid of imagination, as the petty bourgeois always is, he lives within a certain orbit of trivial experience as to how things come about, what is possible, what usually happens, no matter whether he is a tapster or a prime minister.”
These days, pettiness is openly flaunted by the powerful, who are uniquely capable of sending their own smallness radiating throughout the culture. It stretches from Washington to America’s biggest pop star: On her new album, “Reputation,” Taylor Swift re-establishes herself as the perpetual victim in a career-spanning spat with Kanye West. (The first single was titled “Look What You Made Me Do,” as if it were blaming us for its existence.) Business moguls can act small, too. After workers at the local New York news sites DNAinfo and Gothamist voted to unionize, the billionaire owner Joe Ricketts quickly laid off all of them and, out of what seemed like sheer pique, shuttered the websites, briefly wiping archives of reporters’ work from the internet.
Pettiness often manifests itself as an outsize form of revenge — responding to mild slights by putting an absurd amount of energy into plotting meaningless reprisals. (One theory even claims this is how Donald Trump wound up president: His drive to run swelled when Barack Obama made fun of him at a fancy dinner.) There is something unseemly about this habit among the powerful. But when it’s practiced by others, there is a delicious sense of possibility in it — a kind of freedom in going to the mat over things you’re expected to brush off. Hence black Twitter’s embrace of the concept, which sloshes through the digital world in countless jokes and anecdotes and reaction GIFs from black television shows: say, a clip of Traci Braxton, of WE TV’s “Braxton Family Values,” spelling out “P-E-T-T-Y,” or the one from Bravo’s “Married to Medicine,” in which Quad Webb-Lunceford says, “Honey, you are petty boots!”
Here, “petty” constitutes a reclamation. Just like the insults “geek” and “nerd” have been adopted as proud signifiers of niche interests, identifying as petty signals a willingness to point out slights and center details that are overlooked in the wider culture. But while geeks are imagined as masculine and white, petty is both racialized and a little bit feminized. It’s a light cultural rejoinder to the concept of microaggressions, those passing instances of everyday racism that add up into a larger, more insidious picture. (See, for instance, Bossip’s gleeful dragging of Taylor Swift’s “kale-infused” and “tapioca-splattered” performance of innocence, and the “hilariously petty” reactions it’s inspired.)
As with every cultural trend pioneered by black people, white people can’t wait to make pettiness their own. BuzzFeed, a master of laundering black internet trends for bigger, whiter audiences, recently added pettiness to its emotional palette, compiling celebratory lists of petty memes and petty texts scraped from social media — often originally posted by black users. The word is emblazoned on sweatshirts, on tote bags, on necklaces. The trouble is that, when you strip pettiness of cultural necessity and make it accessible up the ranks of the privileged, it risks becoming something monstrous. Not everyone in America can be the underdog, leveraging his or her own grievances as refreshing and liberating. At some level, all you have is a powerful person putting all of his weight behind a pointless, small-minded fight.
Once the powerful have embraced childish sparring and petty egoism, though, how can anyone escape it? Tillerson, who once enjoyed unparalleled status as the chairman and C.E.O. of ExxonMobil, tried to keep himself above the fray of that “moron” story by dismissing the whole thing as irrelevant. Instead, he found himself on the receiving end of a barb from his boss. “I think it’s fake news,” Trump said, “but if he did that, I guess we’ll have to compare I.Q. tests. And I can tell you who is going to win.” Even as he’s trying to play down the story and suggest it’s all nonsense, the president can’t resist stooping to claim he’s still the smart one. You can seek the high road, but these days, someone will always try to bait you back to the low one.
