PARIS — Carlos Ghosn, chairman and chief executive of the Renault-Nissan car alliance, gives a clear reason his company is taking the lead in developing moderately priced electric cars.
The rules governing emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases blamed for climate change are going to get stricter, he said. If so, that is bad news for the future of vehicles powered by emissions-producing gasoline and other fossil fuels.
“You know that the only technology that will allow the industry to continue to prosper is zero emissions or very low emissions, “ he said.
Given that premise, electric cars, which do not emit CO2, would be the only available large-scale solution.
While there is much skepticism on the eve of the meetings about climate change in Marrakesh, Morocco, known as COP22, about whether the world is taking big enough steps to prevent temperatures from rising to dangerous levels, the changing attitudes of business leaders are one reason for cautious optimism.
While governments may make the rules, the responsibility will likely fall on businesses to implement energy- and emissions-reducing changes in how they operate and the products they provide to society.
Many business leaders say they recognize climate change as a serious problem and that they are under pressure to demonstrate to their customers and employees, as well as governments and regulators, that they are doing something about it.
“I think the demand comes from the people who buy our products,” said Trisa Thompson, vice president for corporate social responsibility at Dell, the computer maker.
Dell is taking some energy-saving steps, like moving away from delivering computers on daily Boeing 747 flights from China to the United States. Instead, the company is putting the machines on boats.
Dell is also delving extensively into what is known as the circular economy, reusing the plastics in its computers and even exploring the possibility of using plastic debris gathered in polluted estuaries in its packaging.
Ms. Thompson and Mr. Ghosn spoke at a two-day New York Times Energy for Tomorrow conference in Paris that ended Friday.
At the conference, technology companies like Dell and Microsoft said that they saw many business opportunities in the need to save energy and cut emissions.
Rob Bernard, chief environmental strategist at Microsoft, said the world was on the cusp of what he called a fourth industrial revolution and that there was a “healthy paranoia” in most executive suites that if companies did not make better use of resources they would find themselves out of business.
The tech companies say they can make a big contribution through digital strategies, including those that save energy or manage it better. “We believe technology is the backbone of the changes that will solve the world’s big hairy problems,” Ms. Thompson said.
Even what seem to be very traditional companies apparently are capable of change.
Enel, the large Italian utility, is reinventing itself as a much more nimble company focused on renewables and services rather than building large-scale utility projects.
Investing directly in renewables is becoming a larger and more stable business, executives said.
Torben Moger Pedersen, chief executive of PensionDanmark, a Danish pension fund, said the firm had invested about 3 billion euros, or $3.33 billion, in various renewable projects.
“Investors looking for opportunities to invest in large-ticket projects can relatively easily find them out there,” he said.
Clean energy sources, like wind and solar energy, represented more than half of the new electric power capacity installed around the world last year, according to the International Energy Agency, the Paris-based energy security group, which has added climate change to its portfolio.
Yet, leaders of major oil companies warned that despite the powerful shift that was unquestionably occurring, oil and gas would be needed for decades to come.
Ben van Beurden, the chief executive of Royal Dutch Shell, Europe’s largest oil company, said that while Shell was investing in biofuels and other renewable energy, there was no alternative to oil and gas that would pay the company’s shareholders the large dividends they expected.
“At this point in time, of the $30 billion that we invest each year, I cannot find a significant percentage to invest in renewable projects simply because they are not there,” he told the conference.
