Italians historically know a lot about kidnappings. Between 1970 and 1990, more than 600 of them were recorded nationally; between 1975 and 1983, the annual average was more than 50. Kidnappings became such common practice in Italy that a systematized protocol formed around them: Mafia or independent bandits from Calabria and Sardinia would target wealthy families in the North and abscond with their victims to the densely-wooded mountains of the south, where they would hide until a ransom was paid. Kidnappers were also known to sell their victims to other criminal groups as a faster means to cash before the original ransom demands were met.
Of course, this system was not perfect (these were still criminals, after all). But if plans did not move as quickly as hoped for, there was protocol for that, too: mutilating a body part — usually an ear — and sending it to the family as a message. It was a just-gruesome-enough tactic to get the money levers moving and the victims returned. The practice became so common that, in 1991, an Italian law was implemented to freeze the assets of victims’ families as soon as a kidnapping was reported and in doing so remove the profit motive.
Which is all to say: The Getty kidnapping, as depicted in this week’s episode of “Trust,” fit the standard Italian kidnapping model of its time to a T. As both sides began to negotiate Paul’s return, only Paul’s mother is a wreck. This was odd, I thought. The rest of the parties, meanwhile — Primo and his cronies, James Fletcher Chace, J. Paul Getty Sr., his secretary — discuss negotiations with such practiced fluency that it seems as if these kidnappings happen all the time. With the exception of Getty’s status as the richest man in the world, this is business as usual, Italian style.
And this is true down to the location of the first scene, Calabria, where kidnappers often came from. We see Primo driving through the Calabrian countryside to pay a visit to his uncle Don Salvatore (Nicola Rignanese) and his uncle’s “accountant,” Leonardo (Francesco Colella). He has a present for them, says Primo: the Getty boy. From this we can infer that Primo is not the only crazy person in his family; Primo assumes his uncle will be happy to have this insane present. (He is.)
Primo’s official order of business there is to decide an asking price. Primo shoots for the sky: $200 million. This is a Getty heir, after all. Don Salvatore says, “Why not?” But Leonardo — better versed in the rules of the game — reels them back. Getting that kind of money would take too much time, he explains; Getty would have to sell off assets. And anyway, he says, typical ransom protocol is 10 percent of the family’s total assets, “a kick in the balls but manageable.”
He adds, “Nobody goes bankrupt, nobody dies, everybody walks away.” Taken together with the fact that Getty’s wallet is a “clam shell,” as Leonardo notes, they compromise on $17 million.
But every good hostage negotiation needs a good negotiator, and in the absence of that, apparently a relative with a fancy college degree and a lot to lose will do. To that end, Primo threatens his lawyer cousin (Niccolò Senni) into becoming the negotiator. (For official business purposes, Primo gives him the code name Fifty.) Like most people, Fifty quakes in the mere presence of Primo.
Against his will, Fifty takes Primo’s marching orders and gets in touch with Paul’s mom, Gail. This brings about a moment of rare comedy: Fifty — unwilling, frightened and angry for being in this predicament — tries various voices to disguise his identity when he dials Gail and then a local newspaper to pass along the ransom demand. Gail doesn’t believe him (everybody claims to have Paul, she says), and the newspaper can’t understand him as he muffles his voice with a pillow. At last, Fifty succeeds (he plays this frustrated triumph beautifully), and the demand lands on the front page: The kidnappers must have $17 million or Paul will be killed.
Eventually, Gail does believe the kidnappers’ authenticity after Fifty shares the name of Paul’s dogs — insider information that only the real kidnappers would know. (She’s still erring on the side of caution, however: Anyone involved in a plan orchestrated by Paul could have that information, too.)
Later, Fifty gives her a Polaroid taken of Paul, tied up beside the dead, bloodied corpse of his first kidnapper, Bertolini. That image will prove to be enough to convince Getty Sr. that this might not be a hoax after all. But it is James Fletcher Chace — sharp and rational as ever — who gets him all the way there: “What I’m saying is that, when people start getting killed, whatever it is, it’s not a hoax anymore,” he tells Getty (who had just been shown saying he would pay untold amounts of money to buy land from Native Americans for his oil endeavors).
Getty lets out a sigh; he seems genuinely concerned. He sends Chace back to Rome and instructs him to open ransom negations — “with the right people this time,” he adds, letting out a muted chuckle. (He is apparently not that concerned.)
As Primo awaits Getty’s counteroffer, he buys the local bar a round of expensive drinks, anticipating his future riches. But then, Fifty shares Getty’s official response: $600, plus expenses. It’s the most money Getty can pay before it turns into extortion under Italian law. Getty is still the consummate business man, and as he points out to one of his girlfriends, he can load the expenses side of the ledger “like a packhorse.” That amount should be enough to privately satisfy the kidnappers and ensure that the Gettys are seen publicly not to pay ransoms, and thus stay invulnerable to future kidnappings. (To his credit, Getty at least thinks he has figured out a way not to get his grandson killed.)
Primo, meanwhile — perhaps because he doesn’t know the law — can only fixate on the $600, not fully grasping how lucrative those expenses could be. He’s done with this affair, he decides, and immediately reverts back to his psychopathic killer personality. He orders his translator, Angelo (Andrea Arcangeli), and his henchman to shoot and bury Paul, who, he says, better be dead by the time he returns with gas — presumably to burn the evidence.
But at the very end, a twist: Throughout the episode, Primo’s translator, Angelo, is shown having empathy for Paul — asking if he has a girlfriend, wondering what his life was like in California — and Paul opens up to him. Paul would introduce him to Mick Jagger, if he could; he’d even have him in his wedding. So when Angelo is sent to fetch Paul for the execution, he decides to save Paul’s life instead. “Hippy,” he says to him, while his partner waits outside with a gun, “we need to get out of here.”
And with that, the stage for another escape is set.
Spare change:
There were some atypical, emotionally rich surprises in this episode. They’re a little distracting from the main story, but they are entertaining, almost like Getty fan fiction:
• Getty’s Sutton Place gardener, Dennis (Jo Stone-Fewings), and Bullimore, Getty’s dedicated servant, may be on the verge of an affair. Bullimore checks in on Dennis after Getty heartlessly releases his attack dogs on him, wondering if Dennis is gay. Dennis greets Bullimore at his door and invites him inside. Bullimore — a man who loves things arranged just so — is blown away by Dennis’s plant-filled hide out. He relents to having a beer with him, and the chemistry ignites between them.
• Getty’s primarily girlfriend, Penelope (Anna Chancellor), is having an affair of her own, and Getty senses it. He makes mention, time and again throughout the episode, of how often she has been leaving Sutton Place for reasons she does not disclose. Again, we may be seeing real emotion from Getty (even if it takes the unimpressive form of jealousy) tucked somewhere beneath those cold layers.
• Finally — the greatest shock of all — we learn Primo is scared of something: his uncle. When he shares news of his gift (Paul), he gets cocky about it. “If we’re asking for peanuts,” says Primo, “I’d rather do it alone.” His uncle is outraged and slaps him, hard. “You dare to come here with a gift and take it away again?” he asks. “Your pardon, uncle,” Primo says, twice. He appears to be under his uncle’s thumb, which is unexpected from the man who willy-nilly shoots people in the head. In future episodes, I imagine we’ll learn more about where that subservience comes from.
