Times Insider shares historical insights from The New York Times. In this piece, David Dunlap, a Metro reporter, looks at the fourth major transition of power in the Ochs-Sulzberger family.
Cynics among us (Really? Cynics in a newsroom?) called it the great bake-off.
The bake-off ended Wednesday with cupcakes and congratulations for Arthur Gregg Sulzberger, 36, after he was named deputy publisher of The New York Times, an appointment that “positions him to succeed his father as publisher and chairman,” as Sydney Ember reported.
Succession chatter at The Times is like the perennial national speculation that always occurs about the next presidential election long before the current campaign has ended.
But members of the Ochs-Sulzberger family conveyed how serious they were about finding a leader for the next generation when A.G.’s father, Arthur Sulzberger Jr., announced a year ago that a process had begun to name a deputy publisher.
The younger Arthur takes his middle name from his mother, Gail Gregg, a painter and writer. His father had rebelled against the prospect of calling the baby Arthur Ochs Sulzberger III. It sounded too royal.
There is no escaping a sense of dynastic destiny, however, given that the current generation controlling The Times — principally Arthur Jr., the publisher and chairman, and his cousin Michael Golden, the vice chairman — is the fourth to do so.
Two Times publishers came from the third generation: Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, more familiarly known as Punch, who was Arthur Jr.’s father; and Orvil E. Dryfoos, who was married to Punch’s sister Marian.
Mr. Dryfoos took over from his father-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, who had married Iphigene Ochs, the daughter of Adolph S. Ochs. She was a quietly powerful force at The Times over many decades, and no less a leader of the second generation than her husband.
Her father, Mr. Ochs, the publisher of The Chattanooga Times, bought The New York Times in 1896.
As patriarch, he could not bear to plan a succession, so the first generational transfer was rocky. Arthur Hays Sulzberger was not the obvious first choice. That was Julius Ochs Adler, Mr. Ochs’s nephew.
A “simmering rivalry” developed between Mr. Sulzberger and Colonel Adler, Susan E. Tifft and Alex S. Jones wrote in “The Trust: The Private and Powerful Family Behind The New York Times.” It was made worse by Mr. Ochs’s refusal to designate one or the other as his intended successor, fearful that to do so would diminish his own power while alienating one branch of his family or the other.
Even the secret intervention of Iphigene with her father, on behalf of her husband, failed to resolve matters. Mr. Ochs died in 1935 without having named the next publisher. That job was left to members of the Ochs Trust: Colonel Adler, Mr. Sulzberger and Mrs. Sulzberger. The colonel was outvoted. And embittered.
Partly to avoid another rancorous transition, Arthur Hays took early steps to groom his successor.
Mr. Dryfoos was named president of The New York Times Company in 1957, giving him four years to prepare for taking the job of publisher when Mr. Sulzberger retired. He was 48 when he succeeded.
“It was assumed by the Sulzbergers that Dryfoos would be the paper’s chief executive through the 1970s, and there had meanwhile been no sense of urgency about developing a successor,” Gay Talese wrote in “The Kingdom and the Power.”
Mr. Dryfoos, however, had long suffered from an enlarged heart. Taxed to the utmost during a 114-day strike by the printers, without whom The Times could not be produced, Mr. Dryfoos died soon after the strike was settled in 1963.
Reporters wondered whether Punch’s sister Ruth, a capable newspaper executive, might succeed Mr. Dryfoos. (Indeed, she became publisher of The Chattanooga Times. She is Michael Golden’s mother.) Another family member mentioned as a possible successor was John B. Oakes, the editorial page editor.
But it was a measure of how flat-footed the Ochs-Sulzbergers had been caught by Mr. Dryfoos’s death that even names of nonfamily members like Amory H. Bradford and James Reston were floated as prospects.
Of course, there was always 37-year-old Punch Sulzberger. But he was regarded as a lightweight. “To be honest, few of the top Times personnel regarded Punch’s abilities highly,” Harrison E. Salisbury wrote in “Without Fear or Favor: The New York Times and Its Times.”
Mr. Sulzberger had two critical allies, however: his parents, Arthur Hays and Iphigene.
“For three weeks we carefully considered the alternatives,” Mrs. Sulzberger said in her memoir, “Iphigene: My Life and The New York Times,” written with Susan W. Dryfoos. “We wanted to keep The Times a family enterprise, if possible. After much deliberation, we decided to take something of a gamble and name our son as the new publisher.”
History vindicated their gamble. Having successfully battled an effort by the White House to restrain publication of the Pentagon Papers, Punch went on to oversee a transformative modernization of The Times.
Then, in 1988, to ensure an orderly succession, Mr. Sulzberger named his 36-year-old son to be deputy publisher.
Sound familiar?
