Nine years ago, Renu Khator became president of the University of Houston with an ambitious plan to transform it from an undistinguished commuter school into a “nationally competitive university,” as she likes to put it.
In addition to hiring noted faculty members, undertaking major construction and doubling research spending, she also strove to have the kind of big-time football team that students, alumni and the city could rally around — one that could reinforce the sense that Houston was a university to be reckoned with.
Although Houston was then in Conference USA, one of the lesser college athletic leagues, the Cougars became a football powerhouse, going 13-1 in 2011. Still, that December, even before the team had played its bowl game, its coach, Kevin Sumlin, jumped ship, moving to Texas A&M, which was poised to join the powerful Southeastern Conference. His annual salary was $2 million. (It is now $5 million.)
After a few years in the wilderness, Houston again became a powerhouse when it brought in a dynamic young coach, Tom Herman, a former offensive coordinator at Ohio State. In 2015, by which time it had joined the American Athletic Conference, Houston lost only one game and manhandled Florida State in the Peach Bowl. Hoping to keep Herman at Houston, Khator ripped up his contract and gave him a five-year deal that included both a carrot (a $3 million salary) and a stick (a clause that called for him to pay the university $2.25 million if he left within three years).
“We’re going to make it really hard for him to choose to go to another institution,” Hunter Yurachek, the Cougars’ athletic director, told The Houston Chronicle after the deal was unveiled.
As it turns out, it was still not all that difficult for Herman to leave. On Sunday, Herman stood up at a news conference in Austin, Tex., to affirm that he would be the new coach at the University of Texas, a linchpin of the Big 12. His salary will be $5 million.
Herman had spent only two years at Houston. Like Sumlin, he left before a season ended.
Although Khator and Tilman J. Fertitta, the chairman of the University of Houston System Board of Regents, issued gracious statements, people at the university are dismayed that Herman departed so quickly.
Herman’s ties to Texas — he was a graduate assistant under Mack Brown, its coach from 1998 to 2013 — might have made the move impossible to resist. But Houston was reportedly willing to match Herman’s salary offer. It was building the kind of infrastructure meant to appeal to a coach and his recruits: a new football stadium, a $1 million locker room renovation and, further down the line, an indoor practice center and a football operations building. There was enormous enthusiasm for football on campus. And Khator had made it clear that she would do whatever it took to have a successful football program.
What she could not offer, of course, was a spot in a Power 5 conference. And in truth, that is the real reason Herman left: The name-brand teams in the Big 12, Atlantic Coast, Pacific-12, Big Ten and Southeastern Conferences regularly get to compete to be in the lucrative four-team College Football Playoff, which they essentially control. They get the best slots on television. They have unmatched fan and alumni support. It is easier for them to recruit the best high school players. They can absorb multimillion-dollar buyouts for hot coaches like Herman without breaking a sweat — while paying millions more to departing coaches whose contracts still have years to run. In football, especially, the Power 5 conferences are the insiders, their hands firmly on the controls, and everyone else is on the outside looking in.
This raises a painful question that Houston must now grapple with: For all of Khator’s ambition, and the team’s recent success, can Houston ever truly be a football power if it is not in a Power 5 conference? And will its head coaches always view it as a steppingstone rather than a destination?
It is not as if Khator has not tried to get into a major conference. This year, when the Big 12 was flirting with the idea of adding two members, four universities from the American Athletic Conference — Cincinnati, Memphis, Connecticut and Houston — vied to be considered. To anyone watching from the outside, it seemed as if Houston would be a shoo-in. (In the end, the conference decided to stay with its current 10 teams, in large part because its television partners objected to the expansion.)
After all, Houston is in the country’s eighth-largest media market, larger than any other Big 12 market. It is also a market that tends to prefer SEC games to Big 12 games, something Houston’s inclusion would probably have changed. Unlike the other three A.A.C. colleges, which were primarily basketball schools, Houston had shown that it knew how to build winning football teams and generate fan enthusiasm, even without the advantage of being in a Power 5 conference. The Big 12 already has four teams from Texas — Baylor, Texas, Texas Christian and Texas Tech — so Houston made geographic sense and had the potential to lead to heated rivalries.
What’s more, much of the Texas political establishment was behind Houston’s bid, with Gov. Greg Abbott and Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick expressing hope that the Big 12 would let Houston in. And Khator lobbied the presidents of the Big 12 universities relentlessly.
But seeking to join a Power 5 conference is like trying to join an exclusive club: Ultimately, the current members will decide, and the reasons will not necessarily be for the good of the conference. In particular, Texas was not keen to have Houston become a Big 12 rival. Why? Because the Houston area includes some of the most fertile recruiting territory in the country — and Texas has a long history of attracting star players from the region.
At Houston, Herman had succeeded in recruiting some of those players, winning over enough of them to build competitive teams. If Houston had gotten into the Big 12, especially with a coach like Herman, Texas would have to worry that it would start to regularly lose important recruits to the Cougars.
What is more, the Big 12 teams would have had to share the money they received from their television contracts and other leaguewide revenue sources with the newcomer. Last year, the Big 12 parceled out $304 million to its 10 teams: That is more than $30 million a team. (The University of Texas makes an additional $15 million from its Longhorn Network.) The A.A.C., by contrast, is expected to send each of its teams $3.1 million this year.
Over all, the University of Texas — partly because of its tradition, partly because of its membership in a Power 5 conference and party because its former athletic director DeLoss Dodds cut shrewd deals throughout his lengthy tenure — generated $183 million in athletic revenue last year, including $10 million in profit. Houston, in contrast, has $44 million in revenue, of which $25 million comes in the form of a subsidy from the university.
The Houston athletic department is projected to get to $80 million in revenue over the next few years. But that is still $100 million less than what Texas generates now. At a recent conference where I heard Khator speak, she cited Texas Christian University as an example of what happens when a college joins a Power 5 conference.
In 2011, T.C.U. played football in the Mountain West Conference, in which it was one of the dominant teams; its athletic revenue was $17 million. By 2015, as a member of the Big 12, that number had jumped to $80 million, thanks in large part to the television money provided by the conference.
Of course, money alone will not solve Khator’s problem. If the university sticks with hot up-and-coming coaches like Sumlin and Herman, it will risk seeing them depart as soon as they have a few good seasons at Houston. And if it searches for a coach who is likely to stick around, he might lack the requisite fire in his belly. The only way to latch on to a rising coach who will stay awhile is to join a Power 5 conference and have a chance to win national championships.
But as Khator discovered this year, this is simply not something she can control. Nor is there any sense in railing about such unworthy universities as Rutgers, which was invited into the Big Ten not because it had a storied athletic department (it most decidedly does not) but because it would open the New York market to the Big Ten Network.
Which is not to say Khator is giving up. “Look how far we have come,” she told me Monday, pointing to the facilities and the way football has captured the campus. “It is so much more an attractive place. We have the tools, the city, the environment.”
She added: “We have a long-term commitment to build a national program. No matter what we do, we cannot settle for mediocrity.”
Khator concluded by saying, “I like challenges.” That is a good thing. Getting a football team the same kind of brand awareness and national spotlight — and money — as a Power 5 program without being in the Power 5, well, that is a puzzle no one has solved.
Maybe she’ll be the first.
