Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Via Apple Podcasts | Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher
Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, returned to Capitol Hill on Wednesday for a second day of hearings on the company’s mishandling of data.
Unlike their Senate colleagues, House members came prepared with tough questions about privacy and the social media company’s practices — as well as a counternarrative to the story Mr. Zuckerberg and his team have carefully crafted. And calls for congressional oversight are growing.
On today’s episode:
• Kevin Roose, who writes about technology for The New York Times.
Background reading:
• After questioning Mr. Zuckerberg for two days, all lawmakers seemed to have learned is that social media technology — and its potential for abuse — has far outpaced Washington.
• The public scolding on Capitol Hill may do little to change how Facebook powers its $40.6 billion business: meticulously monitoring what you do online. Here’s how it’s done.
• The biggest obstacle to regulating Facebook is not Congress’s lack of digital expertise, Mr. Roose argues in a column. It’s a lack of political will.
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.
From your mobile device:
You can listen and subscribe to “The Daily” from any podcast player. If you’re reading this from an iPhone or other Apple mobile device, tap this link to listen in Apple Podcasts. If you’re on an Android device, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.
Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)
From a desktop or laptop:
Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:
Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
On Google Home:
You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
