How should we stop corporations from leaving the United States, as both presidential candidates have vowed to do? After Pfizer announced this year that it wanted to merge with the Ireland-based Allergan in a maneuver known as a corporate inversion, the Obama administration put in new tax rules that effectively scuttled the deal.
President Obama characterized inversions as a way American companies to “get out of paying their fair share of taxes here at home.” Last month, the Chamber of Commerce sued to block the new rules, saying that the administration “simply rewrote the law unilaterally.”
We need to put aside the politicized allegations that inversions are a way for corporations to cheat the rest of America. This sort of language confuses the issue and obscures a central fact: All of these corporations are owned by shareholders who should, in theory, reap the benefits of a lower corporate tax bill.
Unfortunately, in our zeal to keep companies in the United States, we have created policies where inversions benefit some shareholders at the expense of others. Perversely, the inversion rules are more likely to punish American investors and long-term investors to the benefit of senior executives, recent investors and tax-exempt investors, including those overseas.
In a recent paper, we look at 60 inversions by United States public companies dating back two decades, to when policy makers started to discourage companies from leaving the United States by requiring stockholders to pay capital gains taxes on their shares at the time of an inversion.
Overall, taxable shareholders lost 1 percent to 3 percent on the value of their shares. This may sound small, but it amounts to around $6 billion in extra taxes for the shareholders. So while inversions reduce the corporate taxes collected by the Treasury, the extra taxes paid by shareholders offset that loss by about 40 percent.
Fifteen percent to 20 percent of shareholders in the deals we studied were made worse off from inversion. The anti-inversions tax rules are especially bad for long-term investors who have higher capital gains because they have seen their shares appreciate significantly over the years. For example, investors who bought Pfizer five years ago have had their shares appreciate by 80 percent; investors who bought 25 years ago have seen their shares grow by six times (adjusted for splits).
For older Americans who plan to bequeath shares to spouses or heirs, an inversion is especially costly. These individuals end up paying capital gains taxes upon inversion that they would otherwise avoid through a bequest.
In effect, one group of shareholders writes a large check to the government for all shareholders to reap the benefits of lower corporate income taxes in the future. For some shareholders, an inversion can be quite expensive. Former directors of Medtronic voiced their opposition to an inversion that engendered a substantial tax liability for longtime shareholders.
(The tax cost of an inversion also explains why companies with founders who hold large ownership stakes, like Facebook, would never consider inverting: such a maneuver would require Mark Zuckerberg to cut a $14 billion check to the government to cover the capital gains tax on his shares.)
But tax-exempt investors enjoy a nice return from inversion of 4 percent to 7 percent. These include investors in millions of retirement accounts, pensions and endowments across the country, who do not pay taxes when an inversion occurs. Even tax-deferred investors, such as most 401(k) and traditional I.R.A. accounts, are exempt from capital gains taxes.
Foreign shareholders also benefit, as the I.R.S.’s special tax rules don’t apply in other countries.
There’s a third group that benefits: corporate executives. We found that the chief executive’s wealth increases 3 percent to 4 percent, despite the personal tax consequences of inversion. This is in part because stock options, unlike shares, are not subject to capital gains tax at inversion. In 2004 the government added a tax on pay for executives of inverting companies but the companies began reimbursing their executives for this expense, passing the cost along to shareholders.
There are several steps the United States can take to discourage inversions. A lower corporate tax rate and the removal of taxes on foreign earnings would certainly reduce the incentives for companies to leave. If we coupled a lower corporate rate with a reduction in the deductions companies now have, we could maintain the current level of tax revenue while at the same time simplifying the tax code and remaining competitive.
First, though, we should abandon the policies that have punished long-term and older taxable American shareholders, while other investors — foreign, tax-exempt and corporate insiders — benefit. And the rules have failed in their primary mission of discouraging corporate inversions: Companies worth over half a trillion dollars announced their intention to invert since 2014. In short, we have the worst of policy effects: unintended consequences and no intended ones.
