The script of “Orwell in America” has several shortcomings, all of them excusable once its lead actor, Jamie Horton, starts to speak. As the title character, Mr. Horton delivers perhaps the finest performance I’ve seen Off Broadway this year, and greatly raises the worth of this moderately interesting play.
Set not long after World War II, the story imagines George Orwell visiting the United States to promote his newest book, “Animal Farm.” The middle-aged Orwell — or call him by his birth name, Eric Blair, if you wish — is paired with Carlotta (Jeanna de Waal), a young and attractive publicist who shepherds him from reading to reading.
Orwell’s speeches, either in rehearsal with Carlotta or made directly to the audience, survey his writings, offer biographical anecdotes and announce his hope that socialism will triumph in the postwar world. That view isn’t well received by Americans, who are entering an age of Red Scares and witch hunts.
“What exactly did you think you would find when you came here?” Carlotta asks, reminding the writer that his audiences have been puzzled by or aggressive toward him. “Surely you’ve read our newspapers. You’re aware of our climate.”
Orwell is committed, however, to outlining the distinctions between political systems. “We cannot allow Stalin, a communist, to tarnish the good name of socialism,” he says, unaware of the futility of such a battle.
Joe Sutton’s script is light on drama, outside of moments manufactured to spark tension — Orwell attempts to flirt with Carlotta; recorded voices heckle him midspeech. It doesn’t help that Ms. de Waal is given little to do besides ask questions of her guest. Mr. Sutton has created an intriguing scenario, with proficient dialogue. Yet over all, the tale is passive and seems to end at least twice before the lights finally come down.
Still, Mr. Horton is dynamic, whether dispensing quips or recalling horrors he has witnessed. While there’s scant spectacle — voices rarely rise beyond conversational level — Mr. Horton remains transfixing as he morphs from introspective to lively to frustrated. His recollection of wartime rationing in England is poignant and tough for him to recount, and a scene describing the plot of “Animal Farm” is revealing no matter how well you know that novel.
“Orwell in America,” directed by Peter Hackett, is a well-meaning bio-play of a slice of life that didn’t happen — Orwell never made it to the United States before his death in 1950. Had he, though, you’d like to think that he would have been every bit as captivating as Mr. Horton’s portrayal.
