Article: At World Chess Championship, Familiar Overtones of East-West Politics 
Before Reading
In 1972, American chess champion Bobby Fischer faced off against the Russian grandmaster Boris Spassky for the World Chess Championship, in Iceland. Dubbed “The Match of the Century,” the championship briefly ended the Soviets’ 24-year domination in the sport. The match was shown on television.
This year’s World Chess Championship features the youngest-ever players, one from Norway and one from Russia. With a classmate, imagine how the World Chess Championship might have changed, and how it might have remained the same, since 1972. Consider technology, world politics and the game of chess itself in your discussion.
Questions for Comprehension and Analysis
1. The article describes the World Chess Championship as “A Cold War battle.” Why? Why is President Vladimir Putin of Russia issuing a warning to NATO countries, and what is that warning? What does this have to do with the World Chess Championship?
2. What is the current geopolitical relationship between Norway and Russia, according to the article?
3. The article says, “But the political backdrop to the match, including Mr. Putin’s military buildup and support for the Syrian government, has been anything but sportsmanlike.” What does this mean?
4. How did holding the chess championship in New York raise “the emotional temperature,” between the countries, according to the article? What is the relationship between President-elect Donald J. Trump and Mr. Putin? Why did the Norwegian chess champion Magnus Carlsen hire Microsoft Norway? How does Russian chess champion Sergey Karjakin feel about Mr. Putin and Russia’s annexation of Crimea?
5. The dramatic matches between the 25-year-old Carlsen and the 26-year-old Karjakin have dragged on for three weeks, resulting in a tie. (The final match will be played on Nov. 30.) From the article, what can you tell about the personalities of each champion?
What Do You Think?
Have you ever watched a chess match in person?
Today’s important chess matches use digital technology and advanced metrics to track every player’s every move, while computer engines predict which player has the advantage. Chess players in professional matches like the World Championship still play on wooden boards in person, facing each other, but today the pieces are wired so each move can be tracked against computer engines’ analysis, for viewers watching the event on their phones or laptops. Do you think this is an improvement for the viewing audience? Why or why not?
For more information on the game of chess and how it is played and viewed today, see this related article from FiveThirtyEight.
