In Tracy Droz Tragos’s documentary “Abortion: Stories Women Tell,” the narratives spill out along with the tears from women who have had abortions as well as those who are fighting to make them illegal. But most striking are clinic patients who felt bereft of anyone to confide in at the time of their pregnancies, and who want to reassure others that they are not alone. A college-bound 17-year-old, for one, says she feared breaking her grandmother’s heart. A woman with a physically abusive husband simply had no one to tell.
Ms. Tragos, who plays down the politics in favor of the personal, focuses on Missouri, which has some of the country’s strictest regulations on abortion and only one clinic that performs the procedure. As a result, many women travel across the border to Illinois. At a clinic there, we meet a pregnant gynecologist whose work includes performing abortions. Her staff members reflect on the toll of their work: The parents of one won’t speak to her because of her job; another shakes her head over mothers and fathers who evict their pregnant daughters, asking, isn’t that when they need their families most?
Outside the clinic, the parking lot at first resembles some sort of heartland V.F.W. gathering, with men who appear to be in their 70s marching, singing and waving protest placards. Close up, you can see the embryonic imagery on the signs and hear threats of damnation.
At the University of Missouri, volunteers distribute anti-abortion leaflets. Their organizer takes a light approach as she offers information on alternatives. Beside her group is a peppy contingent supporting Planned Parenthood. A young woman walks up to the organizer, challenging her, and a loud debate ensues.
What Ms. Tragos succeeds in illustrating is that if you take away the signs and listen to the stories, there is little difference between women on opposite sides of the debate — at least in the region she covers. They are all human beings who love their children, work hard and largely believe in God.
