Time has not reined in Karen Finley’s fire. This performance artist has been active since 1980 and hit peak exposure in 1990, when she lost a National Endowment for the Arts grant for failing to meet a newly passed “decency clause.” Decades on, and she still has the uncanny ability to go from zero to fury in a split second.
Now Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump are proving splendid inspiration to Ms. Finley, whose work has always explored the intersection between sexuality and power.
Her new show, “Unicorn Gratitude Mystery,” is made up of three short pieces that share an exasperation with the habit of taking refuge in fantasy and contrived distractions to avoid reality.
“Unicorn” begins on a giddy note as Ms. Finley, looking equal parts Stevie Nicks and human disco ball, sashays through the cabaret-like Laurie Beechman Theater as the Talking Heads’ “Take Me to the River” plays. (The costumes are by her daughter, Violet Overn.)
At first she gushes about the mythical title creature as a soothing symbol of freedom, but before long Ms. Finley is seething about the escape-hatch bromides it inspires. “I won’t sit still for you to appear with magic,” she concludes. “There is no unicorn for me. There is no unicorn for you.”
In “Gratitude,” Ms. Finley, in a white pantsuit and blond wig, derisively spouts self-help platitudes about that emotion, before turning her attention to Mrs. Clinton and a certain blue dress made famous by Monica Lewinsky. She riffs like a jazz musician with a preacher’s tension-ratcheting momentum, until she reaches a climax as frank as it is antic.
Ms. Finley can also be wickedly funny. The red “Make America Great Again” ball cap she wears in “Mystery” is instantly recognizable, and her Mr. Trump is petulant, whiny, short-tempered — it’s a takedown rather than an impersonation.
Like the first two, the last piece makes some wild turns, touching upon the concept of blondness in Hollywood and society’s exploitation of war and veterans. The connection between all those elements may be a little fuzzy, but no matter — Ms. Finley knows anger; she also knows entertainment.
