POTTSTOWN, Pa. — At the moment, Donald J. Trump casts a long shadow over this once-thriving community, where steel mills, furnaces, bridge works, brickyards, textile plants and boiler shops provided steady jobs for the city’s working and middle classes.
Since the 1970s, as the region has undergone rapid deindustrialization, these manufacturers, concentrated along the Schuylkill river, have collapsed in the face of foreign competition.
The lineup on High Street tells its own story: Pottstown Cash Traders, Federal Coin Exchange, Rehab After Work Life Counseling, which offers “adult addictions awareness.” It goes on for block after block. Twice as Nice Resold Household, the Pottstown Training and Rehabilitation Center, a National Penn bank suggesting that you “consolidate your debt loans,” Dollar Beauty and Masjid Al-Haqq — an Islamic center — nestle among empty or boarded up storefronts.
Since 1950, the number of jobs in Pottstown has fallen from 12,287 to 9,434, even as the population has held steady at just over 22,000, according to Pottstown Citizens for Enlightened Leadership, a civic organization. The group notes that
In 1950, most of those jobs involved making things: steel, auto parts, castings, sewer pipes, coatings, textiles and pies. Today, only two of Pottstown’s top employers make things: Dana Corp. and Precision Polymer. The Pottstown Hospital Center and the Pottstown School District are by far the largest employers, with 978 and 520 workers respectively.
Pottstown, whose retired and laid-off steelworkers, machinists and tool and die makers have deep roots in the Democratic Party, is just the kind of place where Trump hopes his plan to “Make America Great Again” will resonate and move voters to the Republican column.
Pat Toomey, a former president of the conservative Club for Growth who won his Senate seat 51 to 49 percent in the Republican wave election of 2010, will also have to keep his Pottstown margin of defeat to a minimum if he is to fend off Katie McGinty, a Democrat who served as chief of staff to Governor Tom Wolf.
My interviews this week with Pottstown voters in working and middle class white neighborhoods showed almost no support for Trump among women, but steady support among men.
“I like him because he is to the point, and it’s time for a change, I think he’s got the oomph to rattle some cages,” John Keyser, a nonunion employee at Universal Concrete Products Corporation, said. Universal Concrete is one of the few manufacturing facilities left in the area. Keyser told me that he usually votes for Democrats and thinks that Bill Clinton was “one of the greatest and best presidents we ever had.” But this year he supports Trump:
I’d rather have somebody who does get angry and has feelings than what we have had with politicians who don’t care either way. I like the emotional involvement.
In a number of cases, local support for Trump among white men was based as much on their animosity to Hillary Clinton as it was on their faith in Trump.
“I’d vote for the devil before I would ever vote for that woman,” said a man in his 60s who identified himself only as Keith. In a phrase repeated by at least three others, Keith said that Hillary Clinton “belongs in jail.”
Stacey Weinstein, a 53-year-old psychiatric social worker, reflected the opposite side of the coin: she distrusts Clinton, but sees Trump as by far the worse choice.
“I’m not terribly enthusiastic about her because I think she has done some very underhanded things,” Weinstein said, but “Donald Trump is a misogynist, and I don’t like misogynists.”
What stood out in the interviews I conducted on June 13 here and in an upscale development in East Goshen, 24 miles south of Pottstown, was that the Trump supporters were male, with one exception; Clinton backers were decisively (but not exclusively) women.
David, a computer programmer in Pottstown with strong libertarian leanings who didn’t want to give his last name, said he is “not for Hillary for sure. The history of the Clintons is about corruption.”
David dismissed the controversy over Trump’s claim that the American-born judge who is presiding over two lawsuits concerning Trump University, Gonzalo Curiel, has “an inherent conflict of interest” because he is “Mexican.” David argues that “politics is politics. People sling mud all over the place.”
Seemingly unaware of Trump’s opposition to free trade agreements, David said that he believes that “International trade is good, local trade is good, all trade is good.”
What makes the Trump campaign especially interesting in Pennsylvania is that Trump is going to be a crucial factor in the Toomey-McGinty Senate race.
According to Quinnipiac, Toomey is currently tied with McGinty — not a strong position for an incumbent running against a relatively unknown challenger. Trump poses a key dilemma for Toomey who must decide whether or not to endorse the Republican presidential nominee. In ordinary elections, this is not even a question.
But for Toomey it is a major decision because of two conflicting strategic calculations.
On one hand, Trump has a base of intense, even fanatical, support in much of rural and small town Pennsylvania where Toomey has to win by large margins. Toomey cannot afford to alienate these voters. In 2010, he carried small town voters decisively, 60 to 39 percent.
On the other, Trump threatens to provoke a level of animosity among voters in the Pittsburgh and Philadelphia regions, both Democratic bastions, that could swamp all statewide Republican candidates.
Initially, Toomey appeared prepared to stand up to Trump in a gamble that the presumptive presidential nominee’s Pennsylvania voters will cast down-the-line Republican ballots no matter what.
In an op-ed published in May in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Toomey declared:
Trump was not my first, second, or third choice. I object to much in his manner and his policies. His vulgarity, particularly toward women, is appalling. His lack of appreciation for Constitutional limits on executive powers is deeply concerning. I disagree with his proposals to ban Muslims, to give government more eminent domain powers, to be neutral between Israel and its enemies, and several others. In short, I find his candidacy highly problematic.
In order to win his support, Toomey wrote:
It is up to Trump to make the case for himself in a way that reassures the millions of Republicans and non-Republicans who have grave doubts about him.
Since then, however, even as Trump has offered no such reassurance — just the opposite, in fact — Toomey appears to be wavering.
Last week, in the midst of the furor over Trump’s attacks on Judge Curiel, Toomey criticized Trump’s remarks as “deeply offensive.” Nonetheless, speaking to reporters on June 7, Toomey pointedly added:
I’m hoping that Donald Trump can say and do the things that will make me comfortable supporting him.
Toomey went on: “I’m not there yet, I’m hoping to be able to get there, but it’s been problematic.”
In a phone interview on Tuesday, Toomey asserted that
Pennsylvania voters are entirely capable of ticket splitting and distinguishing between members of the same party. Voters are going to evaluate the Senate race entirely independently of the presidency.
Toomey’s hope that he can separate himself from Trump is not widely shared by Republican strategists.
Christopher Nicholas, president of the Republican Eagle Consulting Group in Harrisburg, described Trump as “an anchor” weighing down Republican candidates. The Democrats’ key goal is “to turn out the base in Philadelphia,” Nicholas said. “Trump will serve as a lightning rod doing their work for them.”
In a separate interview, McGinty, whose only previous statewide campaign experience was an unsuccessful bid for the gubernatorial nomination in 2014, welcomed Trump’s presence.
Toomey, she said, “is as hard right as Ted Cruz, but he likes to work in the shadows,” keeping his pro-Wall Street record out of the limelight. “Trump forces Toomey out of the shadows.”
Despite Toomey’s claim that voters will view him as distinct from Trump, three separate Democratic pollsters — who gave me numbers while insisting on anonymity because they did not want to interfere with their current client relationships — report a “strong overlap” in support for Trump and Toomey, on one side, and for Clinton and McGinty, on the other.
Clinton holds a four-point lead in Pennsylvania, according to the RealClearPolitics average of the four most recent polls. Her advantage, however, is based entirely on one survey by NBC/Marist, which gave her a 15-point lead. The three other polls, by Fox News, Quinnipiac and Public Policy Polling, have the race tied.
In the Senate race, Toomey has a large financial advantage over McGinty, $20.1 million to $3.8 million. Ed Rendell, a former governor, told me in a phone interview on Tuesday that he expects McGinty to be outspent, but because the contest has drawn national attention, Rendell estimated that McGinty will raise from $15 to $20 million — enough to be competitive.
“McGinty is terrific on TV,” Rendell said. “She came across very well on TV ads, she speaks well, she has energy and passion.” He cautioned, however, that McGinty “in person, gets distracted” and can go “off message. She is not into candidate discipline yet.”
Toomey is a formidable candidate, according to Rendell, who described the senator as “a very likable person, a pretty decent guy, a guy who isn’t hateful or trying to divide the country.” Rendell added that Toomey is “a perfect blend – a conservative who appeals to the base, yet is moderate in tone and does not say dumb things.”
Nonetheless, Rendell added, “Toomey’s numbers are not great.” Public Policy Polling found he has a 29 percent favorable rating and a 40 percent unfavorable rating. Moreover, Rendell said, Toomey will be “fighting uphill” against what Rendell believes will be “a pretty significant Democratic victory at the top of the ticket.”
The salience voters give to the two major issues of the election — first, the interlocking concerns over terror, immigration and security; second, the economy — will determine the outcome of both the presidential and Senate races in Pennsylvania. 
Regarding the economy, Pottstown is emblematic of what the Pew Charitable Trusts refer to as the “27 financially distressed cities in every corner of the state.” Pew notes that “four in ten Pennsylvanians live in one of them.” Such cities face
chronic budget deficits, are in danger of failing to pay employees, or face default on their bond payments.
In 2013, 27.7 percent of people in Pottstown had incomes below the poverty level, compared to 17.7 percent statewide; 34.7 percent of Pottstown children live in families with incomes below the poverty level, compared to 19 percent statewide.
Immigration is also changing the face of Pennsylvania. According to an August 2015 Quinnipiac survey, 37 percent of Pennsylvanians say “illegal immigrants should be force to leave,” a central Trump theme. The American Immigration Council in 2015 estimated that “1 in 11 Pennsylvanians are Latino or Asian.”
At the same time, population projections by the Census Bureau forecast that the lion’s share of future growth in the state will be heavily concentrated in the highly Democratic precincts of metropolitan Philadelphia.
The massacre in Orlando on Sunday morning by a self-proclaimed ISIS-linked gunman – an American citizen of Afghan descent with a history of Muslim religious observance — has for the moment raised the fear of terror, a development that Democrats in McGinty’s camp privately acknowledge works to the advantage of Republicans.
Toomey, for his part, suggested in our interview that he intends to make terror and security matters central to his campaign. He stressed his opposition to Philadelphia’s “sanctuary city” policy of nonenforcement of deportation efforts.
In addition, Toomey cited his opposition to Obama administration policies that will allow Syrian refugees into this country because “we do not have adequate mechanisms for validating that the people coming here would not pose a risk.” Toomey is preparing to propose legislation in the Senate on Thursday to “prevent those on a federal terrorist watch list from buying guns.” On the Senate floor on Wednesday, Toomey said, “Let’s sit down together and let’s figure out how we achieve this.”
McGinty, for her part, said American policy toward Syrian refugees must be governed by “two imperatives” — primarily that there should be a “thoroughgoing vetting process” to prevent the entry of possible terrorists, but also that we should “be true to our values and principles to welcome those fleeing oppression.”
It is fair to say that one key factor in the outcome of both the Pennsylvania senate race and the presidential election will be how many more, if any, armed-to-the-teeth Omar Mateen-type killers surface between now and Election Day. A volatile mixture of economic stress and globalization — including the globalization of terrorist attacks by nonstate actors — may determine both the near-term and the far-term course of American politics.
