It would be an understatement to say that 2017 was one of the most exciting years in American politics in decades. 
News from Washington dominated headlines and kept New York Times reporters and editors starting early and working late. Nearly two-thirds of The Times’s most-read articles pertained to politics.
Throughout the year, our reporters, photographers and editors shared their reflections with Times Insider on how they covered some of the biggest stories — and some of the more modest scoops, as well. Here is a collection of those tales and our journalists’ recounting of how they unfolded.
A federal judge in Brooklyn came to the aid of scores of refugees and others who were trapped at airports across the United States after President Trump signed an executive order that sought to keep many foreigners from entering the country, leading to chaotic scenes worldwide.
At first I couldn’t find the lawyers. I walked back and forth, texting Julie Kornfeld from the International Refugee Assistance Project, “Where are you I’m at door 2.” She wrote back, “We r near arrivals.” I was so tired, I hadn’t even realized I was looking for them in the departures area.
The arrivals hall at Terminal 4 was eerily quiet. There was a woman selling Dunkin’ Donuts coffee, but the trays in the glass case were bare of food. It would be hours before the doughnuts and muffins arrived. There were a few drowsy passengers. And there was an active if exhausted legal team of three attorneys.
— Nicholas Kulish, Three Pens, a Notebook and Questions: Inside a Late-Night Assignment (February 3)
The acting attorney general, Sally Q. Yates, had ordered government lawyers not to defend in court Mr. Trump’s executive order on immigration.
Shortly after 9, we walked into Upper Press, the suite of offices where the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, works. He was standing next to a desk where an assistant had her finger poised over a keyboard. Scanning the text on his iPhone one last time, he told the aide to hit “send.”
“We just fired the attorney general,” Mr. Spicer said matter-of-factly, turning to Maggie and me.
— Mark Landler, Our White House Reporters Recall Their Most Vivid Moments of Trump’s First 100 Days (April 28)
While at President Trump’s Florida club, the president and his aides coordinated their response to a North Korean missile test. They did not bother to retire to a secure location. 
No sooner had I lifted fork to mouth than an email popped up on my phone: “URGENT 9:30 P.M. CALL TIME.” It was 9:27 p.m. The lid, evidently, was off.
I rushed to rejoin Mr. Trump’s press pool and we piled into S.U.V.s that raced to Mar-a-Lago. On the way, White House sources told me that the president had abruptly decided to join Mr. Abe in a public statement about a missile launch by North Korea that day. Earlier, Mr. Trump had refused to say a word about the test, but this was a president who had already developed a reputation for sudden reversals.
— Julie Hirschfeld Davis, Our White House Reporters Recall Their Most Vivid Moments of Trump’s First 100 Days (April 28)
The United States has been trying to sabotage North Korea’s missile program. Mr. Trump must decide what to do next.
The launches were failing too often.
That was the topic of the conversation I was having one day late last spring with Bill Broad, one of The Times’s premier science writers. Just about every time the North Koreans tried to launch an advanced missile, it seemed to end up in the ocean seconds later. Maybe it was bad luck, we said to each other, or bad parts, or bad welding. After all, the North Koreans are not known for quality control. Or maybe something else was going on.
— David E. Sanger, A Eureka Moment for Two Times Reporters: North Korea’s Missile Launches Were Failing Too Often (March 6)
With crucial staff positions unfilled and no on-site first lady at the time, the White House had to try to organize the most elaborate and heavily scrutinized public event of the year.
I first became interested in the Easter Egg Roll after a colleague alerted me to another quiet drama unfolding on Twitter: The wood products manufacturer that makes the commemorative eggs had been using the platform to nudge Mr. Trump to submit an order for the Egg Roll before he missed the production deadline.
Intrigued, I began calling sources who might know something about the planning of the event. Many professed ignorance and even some alarm about whether Mr. Trump would hold the Easter Egg Roll at all; others told me plans were underway but the event would be scaled back — to about 20,000 attendees from nearly twice that many last year.
It seemed an apt metaphor for a White House plagued with understaffing and disorganization from the start.
— Julie Hirschfeld Davis, My Own Private Easter Egg-Gate (April 15)
The House voted on a revised health care bill that would have repealed and replaced major parts of the Affordable Care Act.
Unlike in the verbal tally in the Senate, though, the House vote is displayed on four scoreboard-like panels inside the chamber. And the panels aren’t visible on C-SPAN. It was time to do some in-person research.
I learned the rules of the House chamber. We could bring laptops, and there would be internet access. But the House press gallery forbids photography; we would have to type out descriptions of any visuals we wanted to capture. We also faced another challenge: hand-entering 431 votes split among four wall-size screens. Worse, the press seats were beneath the screens, making them hard to see. Several ill-placed wall lamps added to the difficulty. And once the voting period ended, the screens turned off, and the vote tally disappeared.
— Rachel Shorey, How We Beat the House — in Tallying the Health Care Vote (May 8)
Mr. Trump abruptly fired James B. Comey, who was leading an investigation into whether Mr. Trump’s advisers colluded with Russia to influence the 2016 election.
Something was clearly going on. After a few minutes, Mr. Spicer opened the door and announced to me and the half dozen other reporters who were nervously waiting that something important would be in our inboxes momentarily.
NBC’s Hallie Jackson pushed him to share more as we all checked our email and saw nothing. Mr. Spicer pointed to ABC’s Jon Karl.
“It’s your question from the briefing,” he said, smiling.
“Comey?” Mr. Karl offered, recalling that he had asked Mr. Spicer whether the president still had confidence in the F.B.I. director.
Mr. Spicer smiled broadly and put his finger on his nose. 
— Michael D. Shear, Breaking the Comey News, One Sentence at a Time (May 10)
Mr. Comey said that the president had tried to derail an investigation into an adviser and that he had lied about and defamed Mr. Comey.
With hearings like this one, I have to preconceive of the scene. I make a layout in my mind of everything that’s going to happen: the moment he arrives, the moment he sits down, the moment he raises his hand to be sworn in. And I set up my cameras to capture all those moments, to be fired remotely, all at the same time. (When I fired the picture of Mr. Comey surrounded by the press, I had the three other cameras firing too.)
I put my fourth camera up on a full-length monopod and held it as high as I could. I pre-focused the shot ahead of time, and spent a little time making sure the image would be sharp. And, as more people arrived, I thought, “There’s no way I can’t put all these photographers into the foreground of the picture.” So I took three or four steps back and zoomed out a bit.
— Doug Mills, A Photo of James Comey Takes the Internet by Storm (June 9)
Mr. Trump said that Western civilization was at risk of decline, bringing a message about “radical Islamic terrorism” and “the creep of government bureaucracy” to Warsaw.
Usually, overseas presidential trips are elaborately choreographed affairs weeks or months in the making, with pre-baked schedules to match. But that afternoon, just five hours before Mr. Trump disembarked, I finally received an email from the White House informing me of his schedule — and my own — for the next day. It was the latest I could ever recall getting such information.
But the Trump White House eschews many of the protocols and procedures that usually surround a president, and advance warning for the press about Mr. Trump’s movements and plans can be difficult to come by. For instance, there was a mention of a “news event” with President Andrzej Duda of Poland, but it would not become clear until the next morning whether Mr. Trump planned to take any questions.
— Julie Hirschfeld Davis, When You’re Traveling With Trump, Be Ready for the Unexpected (July 10)
The president also said in an interview that Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, would cross a red line if he delved into Trump family finances unrelated to Russia.
Whatever else he is, Mr. Trump is a news machine. He generates headlines every time he speaks. He has made the White House press corps a growth industry. With other presidents, we sometimes struggled to find nuggets of news in an interview; with Mr. Trump we were overwhelmed. After the session on Wednesday, I have now interviewed seven presidents — some in office, some after they left — and with Mr. Trump the experience is strikingly different in almost every respect.
— Peter Baker, The New Presidential Interview (July 24)
The debate over what the president meant effectively consumed Twitter — or at least a certain segment of it.
That tweet came on one of the few nights I left the office early, shortly before midnight, so I got the alert while I was driving home. I sat in my driveway for at least 20 minutes, waiting for Mr. Trump to either add to the covfefe tweet or delete it. (Most of us on the Washington bureau staff get Twitter alerts on our phones both when he tweets and when he deletes the tweets.) When he didn’t, I became worried that something had happened to him. Had he fallen asleep? Did he have a heart attack? Was he called down to the SitRoom? It was weird.
— Lara Jakes, On the Night News Desk When Trump’s Tweeting Starts (December 8)
The president’s announcement, made on Twitter, blindsided the Pentagon and congressional Republican leaders and thrilled members of his conservative base.
I suspect that in years to come, when I am recounting what it was like to be a Pentagon correspondent, I will remember far more the combination of hurt and defiance in the voice of a transgender American service member when I asked him how it felt to wake up Wednesday morning to a tweet from President Trump that he was no longer welcome in this country’s all-volunteer military.
— Helene Cooper, A Pentagon Correspondent Keeps Sight of the Person Inside the Uniform (July 30)
The White House press secretary is more understated than her predecessor, Sean Spicer, but she still speaks for a president at war with the news media.
It was Ms. Sanders’s final meeting before the West Wing closed for a summer renovation, and her office was almost bare. A lone houseplant, a holdover from the Obama administration, drooped from a high shelf. “I’ve kept it alive until the last month and now it’s just fallen apart,” she told me.
Was that a metaphor? She laughed. “No, the plant — it just didn’t make it.”
— Michael M. Grynbaum, Just Months Later, Another Press Secretary Profile (August 9)
A Times investigation found that infiltration efforts were broader than previously disclosed and that state and federal agencies have conducted few forensic inquiries.
In fact, we discovered that precious little research had been conducted, the result of legal limits on the authority of intelligence agencies to address domestic issues and states’ historic reluctance to permit federal oversight of elections.
Michael Wines, who covers election issues for the Times, said that what stood out to him was the vulnerability of the nation’s vast Rube Goldberg election system. Elections, he explained, “are run by understaffed, underfinanced and sometimes undertrained local officials, serviced by outside contractors who may or may not be well vetted, conducted with equipment and software that may or may not be secure.”
And Matthew Rosenberg, who covers national security issues for the Times, discovered that the intelligence community’s conclusion — that the Election Day vote was not hacked — was extremely limited in scope.
I started calling around to the election security and technology experts who had witnessed some of the troubles that cropped up on Election Day. I found that they, too, were still searching for answers and were befuddled by the lack of any substantial investigation.
— Nicole Perlroth, In Election Interference, It’s What Reporters Didn’t Find That Matters (September 1)
The calendar of Scott Pruitt, obtained through the Freedom of Information Act, showed fine dining with officials from companies he regulates but few meetings with environmentalists.
The New York Times had filed a Freedom of Information request for Mr. Pruitt’s calendar, with no response from the agency. But the nonprofit group American Oversight sued the E.P.A. over its slow response to a similar request it had filed and received a copy, which it provided to The Times.
Lisa covers the E.P.A. for The Times. I write about regulatory policy and lobbying. We spent much of the weekend reading through Mr. Pruitt’s calendar.
Page after page showed Mr. Pruitt holding meetings with lobbyists and top executives from automobile manufacturers; oil industry giants; pork and soybean farmers; coal mining companies; chemical companies; coal-burning electric utilities; conservative media outlets; Republican lawmakers; even Steve Bannon and Ivanka Trump (they had a half-hour each, in successive meetings, on the same day, before Mr. Trump’s decision on the Paris climate agreement).
— Eric Lipton, Deep in 316-Page E.P.A. Doc, Reporter Finds Hint of Unexpected Turn in History (October 5)
Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona was in political peril ahead of the 2018 midterms, but he said he had no regrets in taking on Mr. Trump. Mr. Flake has since announced that he would not run for re-election next year.
What I remember most about Mr. Flake that day was his mood. He was not defiant, as he would later be in his Senate floor speech. Rather, he was deeply reflective; in retrospect, it seems clear he knew even then that his political career was over.
— Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Our Journalists Share Their Most Memorable Interviews of 2017 (December 18)
The shadowy program began in 2007 and was largely funded at the request of Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, who was the majority leader at the time and who has had a longtime interest in space phenomena.
So how does a story on U.F.O.s get into The New York Times? Not easily, and only after a great deal of vetting, I assure you.
— Ralph Blumenthal, On the Trail of a Secret Pentagon U.F.O. Program (December 18)
