To the Editor:
With the weekend bombings in New York and New Jersey, terrorism has once again gripped the nation’s mind.
As Muslims, we would love to argue against the notion that Islam and terrorism are linked. However, it is becoming increasingly difficult to do so when we see young Muslim men murdering innocent people across the world in the name of their, and our, religion. How can we convince others that Islam, our religion, is a religion of peace?
If we weren’t born Muslims ourselves and had not personally experienced the kind, merciful and peaceful side of our religion, we would also have a hard time believing that Islamic faith teaches compassion, mercy and kindness and not the savagery that is on display by the likes of ISIS and Al Qaeda.
We understand the fear Americans feel. We understand the anger and unease of our fellow Americans. We understand your perspective. And we can only hope that you can understand ours.
We hope you can find some compassion for the 1.6 billion people who are currently watching their/our religion being hijacked by the extremists. We hope you can try to find some compassion for the millions of us in this country who hold our breath waiting for a suspect’s name to be released after an act of violence — and breathe a sigh of relief when he’s not a Muslim.
In these trying times, just like other Americans, we are also angry, and afraid and hurt. But some of us are having a harder time dealing with this than others because one hateful and violent person suddenly represents the rest of us who are trying to do good in this world.
JENAN MATARI
M. RIZWAN SOHAIL
New York
Ms. Matari is the co-founder of the website MissMuslim. Dr. Sohail is an associate professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine.
To the Editor:
My aunt, who lives in a nice suburb outside Cleveland and with whom I rarely communicate, sent me half a dozen terrified texts about this latest terrorist episode.
I live in Manhattan, though not near the site of the explosion. It is a bit strange that a resident of Ohio is more fearful of what is going on in Chelsea than someone who lives close by.
Of course I am concerned, and I am especially concerned for those affected — those wounded and people who live and work in that area. But like most New Yorkers I’m not running scared. I’m going on about my life as I ordinarily do. I keep assuring my aunt that I am well and saying we have to be brave.
STACY SPENCER
New York
To the Editor:
Commenting on the terrorist attacks in New York and New Jersey, Donald Trump declared in an interview with Fox News on Monday that “this is only going to get worse.” He added that such attacks “will happen, perhaps, more and more all over the country.”
The very object of terrorism is, of course, to erode people’s confidence in the ability of their government to keep them safe, in order to provoke changes in the government. By seeking to exploit voters’ fears in a moment of crisis, Mr. Trump is only helping the terrorists achieve their objective. This from a man who claims to have the judgment and temperament to be commander in chief.
STEPHEN DYCUS
Strafford, Vt.
The writer teaches national security law at Vermont Law School.
