To the Editor:
Re “Post-Election, No Appetite for Families” (front page, Nov. 16):
My nearly 99-year-old father has voted for a Republican president every election since he could vote. Despite our differing politics, I have always loved and admired my father. With this election, however, I feel he has crossed a personal line that I’m unsure I can forgive.
I believe that by voting for Donald Trump, he has rejected my core family values of inclusiveness and civic responsibilities. At last year’s Thanksgiving table, we talked about the plight of the Syrian refugees; this year I fear that it will be reduced to the weather — without the part about climate change.
JANET MARKOFF
New York
To the Editor:
Canceling a holiday trip to a home state that voted for Donald Trump is a mistake. Raised in Omaha, Neb., I’m planning to return for the holidays, to channel my political energy, and to encourage friends and family to speak against extremist cabinet selections and policies.
I strongly believe that these trips can re-create a political dialogue and offer a means to tamp down Mr. Trump’s harsh campaign promises, particularly since voices from red states will get far more airtime in the next administration.
PATTY INTRATOR
Brooklyn
To the Editor:
I was shocked right out of my proverbial socks when one of my oldest, dearest friends emailed me to tell me she had voted for Donald Trump. It seemed so totally out of character. But to me, the relationship is a lot more valuable than fuming about her politics.
I abide by the old dictum of agreeing to disagree. I am also a firm believer in the idea that a closed mouth gathers no feet. Hence, because preserving our friendship is so important to both of us, we will not discuss politics.
SANDRA SIZER

Boston
To the Editor:
Re “The Two Americas of 2016” (graphic, nytimes.com, Nov. 16):
You can choose to see the country as divided, or you can choose to see us as one country with various opinions about how to govern for the future.
My in-laws voted for Donald Trump, but we have found ways to talk to them about why we found that a bad decision and in doing so found some common ground. We all think the choices for leadership were less than optimal and are appalled by the violence and disrespect that Mr. Trump has promoted.
But our own pro and con calculations came out slightly different. We each voted against the candidate with whom we least agreed.
Yes, I think there is some real enthusiasm for Mr. Trump and there was real enthusiasm for Hillary Clinton. But I think the more profound reality is that many Americans were dissatisfied with our choices. This makes us more in agreement and less at odds.
SYLVIA SENSIPER
Davis, Calif.
