The first female vice-presidential nominee got a full helping of gender stereotype. “Let me help you with the difference,” George H. W. Bush told the nominee, Geraldine Ferraro, in their 1984 debate, “between Iran and the embassy in Lebanon.”
The first female presidential nominee faces no danger from such an attack. Hillary Clinton holds clear advantages over Donald Trump when it comes to what voters once considered masculine strengths they sought in a leader.
That flows logically from the background of the candidates. Mr. Trump has developed real estate and starred in reality television; Mrs. Clinton served as first lady, senator and secretary of state, where she carved out a reputation for a relatively aggressive approach to foreign policy, including in Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria.
Yet while gender bias remains a real issue on many fronts, Mrs. Clinton’s standing reflects the evolution of assumptions about gender roles ever since the feminist movement gathered force in the 1960s.
“We’ve seen a half-century of evolution in attitudes,” said Ruth Mandel, director of the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University.
American voters once compared male and female candidates through the lens of characteristics they assumed to be inherent. They generally granted women the presumption of greater honesty and empathy; they presumed men, in politics as in business, possessed superior strength and competence.
Those beliefs loomed especially large over the election of the United States’ commander in chief. The first female president was widely expected to be a Republican, on the theory that the party’s reputation for national security prowess could offset a female nominee’s political vulnerabilities.
That calculus has changed. Although it’s a long way from parity, female candidates have become much more common: The 43 women nominated by the two major parties for congressional races in 1974 grew to 121 by 1994, and 174 by 2014. An electorate polarized by party now judges candidates by their affiliation more than anything else.
“Gender stereotypes have gone away almost entirely,” said Jennifer Lawless, an American University political scientist, who compared views of male and female congressional candidates for a recent book, “Women on the Run.”
Americans have grown accustomed to observing female leaders elsewhere, including Margaret Thatcher and Theresa May in Britain, and Angela Merkel in Germany. At home, the Democratic pollster Peter Hart said, the rise of some women to the top of major corporations smoothed a path for voters to envision a woman in the Oval Office.
“There is much greater acceptance of women being able to be seen in that commander-in-chief role,” Mr. Hart said. He advised the 1984 presidential campaign of Walter Mondale, who picked Mrs. Ferraro as his running mate.
Mrs. Ferraro, then in her sixth year in the House of Representatives, didn’t shrink from the “let me help you” barb in her debate. “I almost resent, Vice President Bush, your patronizing attitude that you have to teach me about foreign policy,” she shot back.
Mrs. Clinton need not fear that line of argument. In the poll Mr. Hart helps conduct for NBC News and The Wall Street Journal, voters last month preferred her over Mr. Trump by 26 percentage points on conducting foreign policy, 18 points on handling a crisis, and 11 points on serving as commander in chief.
Nor does Mrs. Clinton, whose truthfulness was called into question most recently over her use of a private email server while she was secretary of state, benefit from any presumption of honesty. Just 22 percent of voters in the NBC-Wall Street Journal poll rated her highly as “honest and straightforward,” the sort of finding that Mr. Trump has worked to exploit by frequently referring to her as “Crooked Hillary.”
Mr. Trump has also sought to attack Mrs. Clinton by suggesting that the success of her campaign is rooted almost entirely in her gender.
“If Hillary Clinton were a man, I don’t think she’d get 5 percent of the vote,” he said last spring. “The only thing she’s got going is the women’s card.”
Stereotypes about women haven’t vanished. Wielded with subtlety, Ms. Lawless said, they can still benefit male politicians among some older and less-partisan voters.
But Mr. Trump alienates younger and better-educated voters more “by being so overt in his rhetoric,” she added. “It’s actually saying to people that he is sexist, and they’re not O.K. with that.”
