This year’s New York Comedy Festival is underway, and one of its shows wants to do more than simply provoke laughter. Specifically, “The New Negroes” and its hosts, Baron Vaughn and Open Mike Eagle, want to challenge ideas about what constitutes black entertainment and expand the discussion about black life in America.
“New York is looked at as the grad school of comedy,” said Mr. Vaughn, an actor and comedian based in Los Angeles (where the show has been performed for the last year). “So to come back to New York and to give a wink to the Harlem Renaissance with the title of the show brings extra significance.”
The title is a nod to the Harlem Renaissance-era anthology edited by Alain Locke, “The New Negro,” which highlighted African-American literature through essays, poetry and more from W. E. B. Du Bois, Zora Neale Hurston and others. It sought to illuminate what it meant to be black in America from various perspectives, and this comedy show has similar aspirations. (Thursday’s 90-minute set at the Bell House in Brooklyn includes Michelle Buteau, Victor Varnado, Josh Johnson Naomi Ekperigin and others, whose jokes will reflect their experiences.)
In telephone interviews, Mr. Vaughn and Mr. Eagle, a rapper based in Los Angeles, discussed tackling provocative issues onstage, creating work that rises to meet audiences’ expectations and more. Here are edited excerpts from those conversations.
Your show’s title is a play on a term with a long history. Did you have any reservations about using it?
OPEN MIKE EAGLE When it was originally presented to me I had second thoughts. I understood the reference, but I was uncomfortable at times when people I work with — that weren’t people of color — said it [the name of the show], and that’s something I had to unpack with Baron. But that provocative nature challenges the notions of what is conjured when people think of that name. I felt like I was allowing the politics around the N-word to affect something that was important to us culturally. I want us to protect that [the word Negro] and not let that go just because people have taken it and associated it with these terrible behaviors and attitudes.
In some ways, the title may lead potential audience members to have preconceived notions of their experience.
BARON VAUGHN I definitely want people to have the expectation that “Oh, some knowledge is going to be dropped; I better be ready to pick it up.” It creates a back and forth with the comedian where we are all feeding off each other. The audience has a certain expectation and the comedians rise to it. People leave really energized, there’s a buzz in the air, an intellectual dance. That’s what lets me know it is a true exchange of ideas. This is a means of taking the temperature of where we are as a culture.
EAGLE I want them to come away feeling like, “Oh, black comedy, black entertainment, black music isn’t what I thought it was,” if they thought that to begin with. I’m still learning how different people interpret the word [Negro] and what notions they come in with. Baron and I sharing our feelings on the news of the day or what’s going on in our personal lives, I think sets the table for openness from the comics and the audience. A lot of times with the faces that people are making, it looks like they are hearing perspectives on things happening in everyday lives in a way they haven’t thought about before.
You are trying to challenge the audience as well as take on some uncomfortable subjects. For example, the debate surrounding the filmmaker Nate Parker, whose 1999 rape case resurfaced recently, has been quite polarized. How do you tackle topics like that?
VAUGHN That expression of “too soon” and “too fresh” is a weird thing. If there’s an event or a tragedy that’s too fresh in people’s minds to joke about, I get it. However, joking about something isn’t necessarily mocking it. Sometimes it might be exposing it for what it is, blowing it up so that people can see it in the context in the story of America, as opposed to this separate event that is in isolation from whatever we are going through. So, something like Nate Parker, yes, it’s fresh, but that’s exactly why we should be talking about it. If we don’t talk about the things that are happening, why are we talking about anything at all? Does something have to be a year old for me to have an opinion on it or a conversation with people about it?
The idea of shifting and dismantling narratives reminds me of new shows like “Atlanta” and “Queen Sugar,” which are redefining black life in America.
VAUGHN It’s been happening in comedy for a long time. Black people have to define who we are, or others do it for us. So letting other people decide who we are and make assumptions about us is what results in what’s been going on in the country the last few years. What I am trying to do is create a space for people to explore what they want to be, as opposed to fit into a label that they have been given.
