LOS ANGELES — Typically, museum fund-raisers in Los Angeles toast art, film and fashion. It’s a love triangle that attracts a diverse constellation of talent.
But this year, politics muscled into the equation at the annual Gala in the Garden at the Hammer Museum here — and the night that raised over $2 million became somewhat of a sly roast of a certain candidate.
“I hope my award is some huge, gold Trumpian atrocity,” the director Todd Haynes joked, just before being honored alongside Laurie Anderson on Saturday night. (The recording of Mr. Trump’s vulgar comments about women had leaked about 24 hours earlier, and many guests sounded off about it over cocktails.)
“Art should be a reflection of the times and how we’re feeling,” said the artist and filmmaker Liz Goldwyn, who arrived with the Sonic Youth singer Kim Gordon. “Thanks to Trump, the times are surreal and we’re feeling very angry.”
Ms. Goldwyn said that she had almost donned her anti-Trump T-shirt but opted for an embroidered knit dress by Bottega Veneta, the evening’s sponsor for the fourth straight year. Actresses like Laura Dern, Mamie Gummer, Sarah Paulson and the Hammer director Ann Philbin also chose looks from the Bottega Veneta creative director Tomas Maier’s fall 2016 collection, though it was a downright balmy autumn evening.
Unlike in past years, the Hammer’s exhibitions were closed for renovations. Still, it was fun to name whose art you might buy if you were, say, a billionaire. Mr. Haynes coveted a Cy Twombly.
The singer Rufus Wainwright, who performed that night, longed for a Cindy Sherman. “She’s sitting over there, so maybe I should go and talk to her?” he said with a laugh.
Jodie Foster — one of the co-chairwomen with her wife, the photographer Alexandra Hedison — took a more socialist tack: “We’re happy to go to a museum to admire art. We don’t need to own it.”
January Jones, who delightfully drank a bottle of beer while snapping her gum, said that she recently splurged on a piece of conceptual art by the Brooklyn-based Mariah Robertson. “My business manager told me to buy it if I loved it,” she told friends. “I was like, ‘Hey, aren’t you supposed to ask me if it’s a good investment?’”
During a dinner in the courtyard, the Norwegian author Karl Ove Knausgaard introduced Ms. Anderson, who accepted her honor with a performance piece that ended with a threat in a deep, distorted voice: “Of course, you ladies must not forget. I can do whatever I want to you, whenever I want to do it. Why? Because I’m a star.”
A social ripple effect ensued, and talk turned to the Republican nominee once again. “We keep making jokes about the situation, but it’s so sad at its core,” said Will Ferrell, whose wife, Viveca Paulin-Ferrell, is a member of the Hammer’s board of overseers. The couple buys a table at the gala every year. “That’s what good art does: It hits you like a fist to the chest,” he said.
