David Crosby’s “Croz,” released in 2014, was his first solo studio album in 20 years. He didn’t wait as long for a follow-up. “Lighthouse,” due out on Oct. 21, is a collection of new songs performed in a sparse acoustic setting, with a warm, bright light trained on his voice and guitar.
Mr. Crosby — who has been inducted twice into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, as a member of both the Byrds and Crosby, Stills & Nash — made the album with Michael League, the bassist and producer-composer who leads the Grammy-winning groove band Snarky Puppy.
“We recorded the album in 16 days,” Mr. Crosby said. “I’ve never done a record that fast — ever, in my life, ever.” (“Lighthouse” is being released on Snarky Puppy’s label, GroundUP, which has distribution through the Verve Label Group.) In their first casual session together, Mr. Crosby and Mr. League wrote three songs in as many days, “and they were three of the best songs I’ve written in years,” said Mr. Crosby, who turned 75 on Sunday.
He’ll play some of the songs from the new album on his current tour, “An Evening With David Crosby,” backed only by his son James Raymond on piano and vocals. Before embarking on the tour — which begins on Thursday at the South Orange Performing Arts Center in New Jersey and runs through mid-September — Mr. Crosby called to discuss the album and his state of mind. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
One point of reference for a stripped-down album like this is Rick Rubin’s work with Johnny Cash, which feels so bone-dry and exposed. That’s not what this is.
No. But if you had Johnny Cash, that’s what you’d do with him, too, isn’t it? [Laughs]
Michael League has said he was thinking about your album “If I Could Only Remember My Name.” Was that something that came up in conversation?
Oh, yeah. Michael, like a lot of people, really liked that record, my first solo record, and listened to it a lot of times. A lot of people have; it’s a good record. I’m being completely immodest, of course, but there you go. So that’s where he got the idea that he wanted to do primarily acoustic guitar tracks, with large and fairly intricate vocal stacks. But this record had its own personality right from the get-go, as soon as we started recording it.
And it’s not the same perspective that you had in 1971.
No. I’m a lot happier now.
On “Croz,” there’s a song called “Time I Have.” You start it by singing: “People do so many things that make me mad/But angry isn’t how I want to spend what time I have.” Does that mind-set extend to this album? 
I spent a lot of my life angry, and I don’t want to, because the less life you have left, the more you treasure it, and the more you are trying to use every minute to accomplish something. That attitude, which comes with age, is all through this record. There’s a choice to be made with every minute that you spend. And I’m spending mine having fun, man, and creating.
At the same time, there are a couple of songs on this album that are very pointed in their critique.
Oh, yeah.
“Look in Their Eyes” addresses the Syrian refugee crisis. What was the genesis of that song?
I have a dear and longtime friend, Marsha Williams, who’s a member of Human Rights Watch, and she goes to Greece and just tries to help. She was telling me about a day when they pulled 1,000 people out of the water, including 70 dead ones: men, women and children. I was very emotionally affected by her story. And as songwriters, part of our job is to make you boogie; part of our job is to take you on a little emotional voyage; but part of our job is to be the town crier and say: Look, these are human beings. They’re just like you. They’re trying to keep their kids alive.
There have been some recent comparisons in the press between the state of our culture and politics this year and the tinderbox of 1968. What’s your response to that?
I think there’s some parallel. The idea that Trump could get to be the candidate of a major party, that’s very disturbing. The situation with regards to us and our military posture with the rest of the world, that’s very disturbing. There’s a ton of really, really scary things. Global warming. Atmospheric poisoning. All of that stuff is critical and crucial, and affecting the overall mess that we’re in. I don’t think it’s the same, but I think that are certain parts of it that resonate. Racially, too.
What about your voice itself, and where you are as a singer?
I can’t explain how I even have a voice, after all the bad things I did to it. But here I am, I’ve got it and truthfully think I’m singing as well as I ever have. Probably some of the best I’ve ever done, in terms of storytelling quality. I could not be happier about the singing. It’s just a joy.
