Last month, Alabama conducted a novel political experiment, conscripting the state’s Republican voters as its lab rats. The question that was officially on the ballot was whom the party should nominate for the United States Senate seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions in February. One option was Luther Strange, a former state attorney general, who had filled the seat since being appointed by a Republican governor who happened to be under investigation by Strange’s own office. The other was Roy Moore, a twice-defrocked State Supreme Court justice described last month by the conservative National Review as “nothing more than a bigoted, theocratic and ignorant buffoon,” who has argued variously that Muslims shouldn’t be allowed in Congress, that homosexuality should be illegal, that multiple Midwestern communities are currently governed by Shariah law and that the Sept. 11 attacks might have been divine punishment for America’s sins.
Political caricatures don’t come much broader than these. Strange was the establishment incarnate; Moore was the Republican electorate’s id made ruddy flesh, an avatar of the latent nativism and conspiracism that Donald Trump’s detractors inside and outside the Republican Party blamed for his rise. The only wrinkle was that the president endorsed not Moore but Strange — and the race, as Katie Glueck of McClatchy newspapers wrote shortly before the election, became “the biggest disagreement to date between Trump and the most committed elements of his base.” The outcome would be an indicator of whether Trump had really captured the Republican electorate or whether the forces that carried him to office were beyond his, or anyone’s, control.
In the end, Moore trounced Strange by nine points. National Review offered hopefully that at least the election contradicted claims that Trump had turned the party into a cult of personality; the contributor Fred Bauer wrote that the result “could be a sign that the Republican base will not be willing to roll over for the president on any and every issue.” Other observers were less delicate. “The Republican base is so nuts,” the Washington Post editorial writer Stephen Stromberg concluded, that even when Trump advised otherwise, “they had to pick one of the most divisive figures in American politics to represent them.” Jamelle Bouie of Slate argued that Moore’s win was evidence of how, “since 2008, many of those voters who comprise the Republican base have grown increasingly untethered from mainstream politics.” This was a “Jurassic Park” vision of the Republican base, in which party leaders, after fecklessly creating and nurturing a monster, find themselves powerless to stop it once the electric fences go out on the island.
A political party’s base, for much of the 20th century, usually came with an indefinite article attached: a base, rather than the base. This was a straightforward reflection of how parties operated, as sometimes lumpy and uneasy coalitions of disparate interests. In 1975, when Ronald Reagan was plotting his second run for president, it was a bipartisan assumption that the Republican Party’s existing bases — an ad hoc assemblage of WASPs, rural Midwesterners and a growing but still insufficient segment of middle-class suburbia — were too narrow and unstable for the G.O.P. to escape minority-party status.
“How do you feel about calls to broaden the Republican Party?” a Newsweek reporter asked Reagan that March. “I am an example of base-broadening,” Reagan replied, “having been a New Deal Democrat most of my life.” Reagan was implicitly speaking not of a Republican base but of the Republican base: a singular constituency that needed to grow and could — especially into the white suburban electorate.
Reagan’s 1980 campaign won seven percent more of the labor-union vote than Gerald Ford did in 1976, but he won just 10 percent of the nonwhite vote, significantly less than Ford. Many of the major contenders for the 1988 Republican presidential nomination ran explicitly on the idea of bringing nonwhite constituencies into the party — none more enthusiastically than Representative Jack Kemp of New York.
“Blacks did not vote Republican because no one ever appealed to them before,” he told the journalist Juan Williams in 1987. The same, he said, went for Hispanics. “I’m staking my whole case on my ability to broaden the base of the Republican Party, not doing it at the expense of principles but building a coalition for democratic capitalism, people capitalism.” Kemp believed that his vision of racial outreach could bring the party control of Washington. Republicans had been a minority in the House for decades, he said. “How long do we have to be chained to some nihilistic faction?”
Kemp lost to George Bush — himself a self-identified base-broadener, but one whose candidacy was marred by the race-baiting “Willie Horton” ad that an outside political-action committee aired against his Democratic rival, Michael Dukakis. Lee Atwater, Bush’s campaign manager, vowed — and later apologized for vowing — that “by the time we’re finished, they’re going to wonder whether Willie Horton is Dukakis’s running mate.” It was a testament to the party’s cynicism, naïveté or both that Atwater, in taking the helm of the Republican National Committee after Bush’s victory, was tasked with improving outreach to black and Hispanic voters.
In 1990, when Bush proposed a tax-reform package that included modest increases in some brackets, House Republicans revolted, led by an ambitious Georgia congressman named Newt Gingrich. “It is a signal,” he told The Washington Post, “that the base of the Republican Party opposes raising taxes and that the package had better be awfully good.” The base had, in Gingrich’s formulation, become something new: not a coalition to be expanded but a force to be propitiated or crossed at Bush’s peril. It was not there to be molded by politicians like Jack Kemp. It was there to give orders to them, through mediums like Gingrich — whose personal policy hobbyhorses, it just so happened, matched the base’s.
Shamanistic base-whisperers like Gingrich proliferated on the right in the 1990s, both inside and outside the party and particularly among conservative evangelical leaders. When Bob Dole — who had campaigned for the 1988 nomination on, as his spokeswoman put it, the “need to broaden the base of the Republican Party” — said he had no “litmus test” for the abortion views of his running mate in 1996, he drew harsh words from James Dobson, the founder of Focus on the Family: “Why does this man insist on alienating the conservative base of the Republican Party?” Ralph Reed, the executive director of the Christian Coalition, advised that Dole “desperately needed to find some social and moral issues that he could grab hold of and use to mobilize the base.” This base harks back to the bases of the pre-Reagan era: It is a constituency with clearly delineated borders and concrete demands. But it does have one crucial resemblance to the aspirational base of Reagan’s or Kemp’s imagination: its singularity. It implies that the Republican Party is not a coalition of interests but the tribune of an essentially unified tribe. And when the tribe stages a revolt, as the Tea Party did a decade later, the leaders have no choice but to follow.
Conservatives often point out, correctly, that today’s Democratic base is, if anything, more monolithic in its policy views than its Republican counterpart, with more uniform positions on issues like abortion, immigration and taxes. This August, when the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee said the committee would not impose an abortion litmus test on its 2018 candidates, the pushback was fierce. Ilyse Hogue, the president of Naral Pro-Choice America, said, “Among the rank-and-file groups that make up the majority of the Democratic base, there is really no split on abortion rights.”
But for all that, the Democratic base remains disparate in one essential respect: the demographics of the people who make it up. Meanwhile, in the years since Kemp’s cri de coeur, Republican identification among African-Americans, Hispanics and Asians has barely budged — but the country’s geographical and demographic trends, along with artful redistricting and the Electoral College, have rendered this inconsequential to the party’s political hegemony.
This explains, in part, the asymmetry of the two parties’ chaotic 2016 primaries. Democratic voters fell out viciously over two candidates who did not differ appreciably on most policy areas but conveyed starkly different ideas of the party. Republican voters, meanwhile, passed over candidates with actual fiscal-conservative and evangelical bona fides, like Ted Cruz, in favor of one whose only sustained and consistent point of contact with past Republican practice was the winking subtext of the party’s white identity politics, delivered without the wink. One party’s base knew what it believed; the other’s knew who it was.
If not even Trump can fully bend the Republican base to his will at this point, it is because doing so would buck decades’ worth of inertia. In May last year, as Trump’s path to victory in the Republican primaries was becoming clear, Matthew Continetti, the editor in chief of The Washington Free Beacon, observed: “The Republican base is the party of Trump. It’s not the G.O.P. that we’ve come to know.” But of course, as Roy Moore could tell you, it is both.
