WASHINGTON — Once, when Mitch McConnell was dishing privately to me on the congressional crisis of the moment, I thanked him for his candor and insight.
“Well,” he said in his distinctive drawl, “you know I’m only telling you this because it helps me.”
I did know. But it also helped me as a reporter. Still, even given my long experience with the canny Kentucky Republican, I was a little surprised to see this frank admission on the first page of his new memoir, “The Long Game”:
“I only talk to the press if it’s to my advantage,” Mr. McConnell wrote, putting it more bluntly than most politicians, even the ones who see it the same way.
Mr. McConnell wasn’t always so dismissive of the press. On another occasion, he recounted to me how, as a new senator, he was envious as he watched senior colleagues being shadowed and pestered by reporters, making him yearn for the kind of stature where someone would pay him similar attention. Nowadays, Mr. McConnell will stroll purposefully past inquiring reporters without so much as a glance in their direction.
The senator has a steely discipline not only when it comes to the news media, but with life itself. His book chronicles his successful struggle against polio as a child, his first neighborhood fistfight, his early obsession with politics, his embrace of civil rights and his slow but steady climb to the position he always coveted and now holds — majority leader of the United States Senate. No White House ambition for him, an attribute that separates him from many of his colleagues.
The book also has a few surprises. It reveals that young Mitch McConnell favored sporty cars — a “little red Corvair,” a 1961 two-seater MG and a 1966 Ford Mustang. He also discloses that he seriously considered not running for re-election in 2014, fearing his could be the defeat that would keep Republicans in the minority. A funny moment occurs when he, as the chairman of the 2001 presidential inaugural, and George W. Bush, the soon-to-be president, briefly panic over the absence of a speaker’s lectern on the inaugural platform, not realizing it would rise from beneath the stage.
Then there is a not-so-surprising revelation to those who have watched Mr. McConnell stubbornly refuse to budge from talking points and doggedly spend day after day on the Senate floor hitting the same rehearsed points.
“Good politics is repetition,” he writes.
Mr. McConnell recognizes that he often plays the villain in the narrative of the contemporary Senate — the charisma-challenged, die-hard foe of overhauling the campaign finance system and the king of the filibuster. He finds victories in the arcana of legislating, gloating that he was the first to realize he could thwart campaign finance legislation by blocking once-routine motions to open conference committee negotiations with the House.
He sees employing such tactics as an obligation, not an obnoxious stalling maneuver.
“Filibustering is sometimes presented as an obstructionist tactic by its opponents, but in my view, if legislation as awful as this bill is brought up for consideration, there is a duty to obstruct its passage,” he says.
On the other hand, Democrats, led by Mr. McConnell’s archrival, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, were — in Mr. McConnell’s partisan telling — guilty of ruining the Senate when they used their numbers and procedural skills to stymie Republicans and push President Obama’s agenda.
“It was utterly depressing to watch what Harry Reid had done to the Senate,” Mr. McConnell writes. Mr. Reid has since called Mr. McConnell classless for his criticism.
Mr. McConnell’s skill as a political tactician belies his low-key manner. Near the end of his book, he recounts another episode I was involved in that led to one of his more memorable political comments.
One reason Republicans were not able to capture control of the Senate in 2010 and 2012 was that hard-right conservative challengers had knocked off establishment-favored candidates in party primaries only to fall to Democrats in the general election.
Brought into the Republican leader’s office for an interview in March 2014, I asked how he expected the party to fare against another round of threatening primary challenges, including one to his own candidacy in Kentucky.
“I think we’re going to crush them everywhere,” Mr. McConnell, not typically known for pungent sound bites, said. “I don’t think they are going to have a single nominee anywhere in the country.”
We proceeded with the interview as I mulled over the comment. I later gave his staff members a heads-up that my article would focus on his bold prediction, a cringe-worthy moment for some of them.
Mr. McConnell acknowledges in his book that his staff was uncomfortable, fearing the remark would be seen as a provocative rejection of the Tea Party voters crucial to Republican prospects.
“Regardless of how my staff felt about it, I believed what I’d said,” he writes. “I had no animosity toward the Tea Party, because we all wanted to achieve the same things. My problem was with the groups who hijacked their agenda for their own profit.”
“And I did it,” Mr. McConnell declares proudly about his success in snuffing out threats from the right and finally becoming majority leader after election wins that November.
The book ends on that triumphant note, before the rise of Donald J. Trump and the threat his presidential candidacy poses to vulnerable Republican incumbents in the Senate.
Mr. McConnell has endorsed Mr. Trump. But he must be concerned that the presumptive nominee’s brash and unpredictable style could now crush Mr. McConnell’s own chances of remaining majority leader.
