JUDASBy Amos OzTranslated by Nicholas de Lange305 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $25.
In a 2005 interview, George Saunders remarked that “all moral concerns in fiction reduce to technical concerns.” He argued for specificity over vagueness — for its ability to make us feel compassion, and for thoughtful fiction’s ability to frame a complex political argument through aesthetic means.
The Israeli author Amos Oz has been publishing fiction and nonfiction since the 1960s. Outspoken about politics, he has always supported a two-state solution in the Middle East, regardless of any given Israeli government’s policies. American readers may be most familiar with his 2004 memoir, “A Tale of Love and Darkness,” which tells Oz’s coming-of-age story against the backdrop of his mother’s suicide and the state of Israel’s founding. (Natalie Portman’s movie version was released this summer.) Oz’s new novel, “Judas,” rendered in sumptuous English by his longtime translator, Nicholas de Lange, similarly exemplifies Saunders’s notion of a relationship between the moral and the aesthetic.
“Judas” concerns Shmuel Ash, a student in Jerusalem who leaves his studies in the winter of 1959-60 “because his relationship had broken down, because his research had stalled and especially because his father’s finances had collapsed.” Oz describes Shmuel’s character and physiognomy in loving, if not always flattering, detail — descriptions that weave with subtle variation through the novel. He walks with his “bushy, bearded head thrust forward, his body leaning with it, as if eager for the fray. His legs always seemed to be chasing after his body, which in turn was pursuing his head, as if they were afraid of being left behind when he disappeared around the next corner.”
Despite Shmuel’s frantic momentum, the narrative slows when he answers an ad seeking a companion for an elderly invalid near Jerusalem’s western edge. Shmuel finds himself captivated by the peaceful old house and its inhabitants. Aged Gershom Wald is “an ugly man, broad, crooked and hunchbacked,” who spends his days pontificating to old friends on the phone. When Shmuel first arrives, the old man greets him with a shout: “Wald! Wald! My name is Wald!” Shmuel is immediately attracted to the house’s other inhabitant, Atalia Abravanel, who has a notable pedigree: Her father, Shealtiel Abravanel, was an early and prominent opponent of Israel’s statehood.
The house’s slowness gives Oz leisure to let sentences unfold. Characters and their ideas occupy the narrative foreground, while in the background a “charcoal-black cat, no doubt a tom, sometimes crossed the yard, slowly, imperiously, his tail erect, padding and gliding on velvety feet, as if each of his delicate paws did not step on the ground but languorously licked the polished paving stones that shone and glittered in the rain.” The book’s prose is meticulous, almost pre-modern. This and the plot’s stillness — days pile up, but many of the novel’s “events” are Shmuel’s realizations — make reading “Judas” feel a bit like reading Thomas Bernhard without the misanthropy.
Instead of building an escalating triangle of plot, “Judas” lets the reader gradually understand things, most important the past that binds Wald and Atalia. For much of the book, their relationship is a mystery; when Shmuel mistakenly assumes Atalia is Wald’s wife, Wald responds: “Atalia is, in fact, my mistress. . . . I am not using the word in the vulgar sense, of course, but rather as in the famous saying of the first Queen Elizabeth of England: ‘I will have here but one mistress and no master.’ ” The thread that ties them together is dark and disturbing — I lost sleep over its imagery — and woven into the fabric of Israel’s bloody history.
Learning Wald and Atalia’s story leads Shmuel to investigate Atalia’s father’s role in founding the state. Alone among the founders, and influenced by “the Arab revolt in 1936, Hitler, the underground movements, the killings, the retaliation operations of the Jewish underground, the hangings by the British and especially his conversations with his Arab friends,” Shealtiel came to believe “there was in fact room for the two communities and that it would be better for them to exist side by side, or one within the other, without the framework of a state.” By the standards of the novel’s time and ours, this is a radical view. Shealtiel Abravanel’s commitment to this idea means being expelled from the Zionist Executive Committee. “People abused and reviled him,” Wald says; “they called him a traitor.”
This connection, made late in the book, sheds light on a thread that has run more or less without explanation through the novel: Shmuel’s abandoned thesis on Jewish views of Jesus and Christian ideas about Judas. At one point he notes: “Jesus and all his apostles were Jews and the children of Jews. But in the Christian imagination the only one remembered as a Jew . . . was Judas Iscariot.” Shmuel imagining Judas’s sorrow after the crucifixion fills a 13-page chapter that slides from third-person narration into a first-person confession in Judas’s voice. Jesus on the cross “wept, shouted and screamed with pain, calling over and over again for his mother, calling for her repeatedly in a shrill, piercing voice, like the crying of a fatally wounded infant abandoned in a field alone, parched with thirst as the last of its blood seeped out under the beating sun.”
Throughout “Judas,” Shmuel’s thoughts on Jesus and Judas appear not as quotations but as exposition. Yet when Wald holds forth, his ideas are expressed and punctuated as dialogue — long tracts of it, happily indifferent to the conventional view that letting characters speechify makes them sound like talking heads. Wald’s monologues are enchanting, part of what makes “Judas” a successful novel of ideas. Oz doesn’t overdo it, though. By folding Shmuel’s thoughts into the text’s narrative fabric, he allows them to double as the character’s ideas and the novel’s own.
Shmuel and Oz both vividly understand the role of the traitor, an epithet Oz himself has at times been called by political opponents. How this ties in to Shealtiel Abravanel’s story — and to Shmuel’s own — is a mystery I will leave you to solve as you read this magnificent novel.
On the surface, George Saunders and Amos Oz may seem different kinds of writers: one funny, one serious; one whose narrators grasp at meaning, the other master of an old-school, highbrow eloquence. Yet they share a sensibility. In that same interview, Saunders says: “I’ve known people who started out wanting to fix the world, and when they find out the world can’t be fixed . . . they retreat to a sort of cynical stance. When you think about it, that’s all ego: The world refused to be fixed by me, the center of the universe; therefore I hate the world.” Amos Oz knows he can do his small part to fix the world through examining its complexities. The ending of “Judas” feels as nuanced as life itself. How could it not? The novel grapples with the humanity of Jesus; the basis of anti-Semitism in particular and prejudice in general; the hope for eventual peace in the state of Israel; love. Oz pitches the book’s heartbreak and humanism perfectly from first page to last, as befits a writer who understands how vital a political role a novelist can play.
