The European postwar order is a shambles. A rich celebrity with no political experience and a flagrant disregard for the niceties of political behavior has become the presumptive nominee of a major American political party. I’ll leave it there for now, though the litany of the dreadful, the unlikely, the inexplicable and the absurd could be extended in every direction. Over in the other major party, the wife of a former president fought off a serious challenge from a 74-year-old socialist. The political institutions that have taken turns governing Britain for most of the last century are in chaos. Let’s not even talk about what’s happening in Russia, Bolivia and Brazil. Who could make this stuff up?
But maybe the question can be put differently: Shouldn’t somebody have tried?
Has reality finally defeated imagination? Recent events have not only repeatedly stumped the soothsayers of the news media but have also exceeded the capacities of a culture industry devoted to the wholesale manufacture of satire, spectacle and fantasy. The world right now is more farcical than the most ridiculous big- or small-screen comedy; more extravagantly and bombastically preposterous than any superhero franchise movie; and a whole lot scarier than any zombie apocalypse or paranormal shriek-fest.
The corps of professional analysts and data crunchers, in journalism and the academy, have been scolded (mostly by one another) for missing signs that pointed to “Brexit” and to the rise of Donald J. Trump. And debates are underway about the causes and symptoms of a condition afflicting many of the world’s democracies. Is it populism or racism? Reaction to economic injustice or defiance of political correctness? Nostalgia for lost privilege or resentment of a new global system?
It isn’t the job of writers, artists and filmmakers to resolve these questions. But movies and television do serve as oases of comfort, even when they seem to be staking out extremes. It could only have been a relief, in the wake of Britain’s vote to leave the European Union, to retreat into the violent, intricate, power-besotted world of “Game of Thrones,” which wrapped up its season on Sunday. The profane, chaotic shenanigans that concluded this season of “Veep” look as decorous as drawing-room comedy next to the actual American presidential campaign. “Scandal” and “House of Cards” threaten to become as earnest and wistful as “The West Wing” was back in the Bush years. Their version of political craziness is rooted in the faith that even a dysfunctional system has some logic, some coherence. Their garish melodramas and dark conspiracies have taken on the rosy glow of wishful thinking.
The screen in front of us is a magic mirror, disclosing truths that might otherwise remain unseen and inviting unchecked speculation about what the world might look like from different angles. Literal accuracy is never the point, but there are nonetheless flaws in the glass — larger, more systemic warps and blind spots. We are invited to think of movies as common property. To call them “popular culture” implies a degree of democratic collaboration between consumers and producers. But of course this kind of democracy is as mediated by money, hierarchy and access as its political counterpart. And it may be experiencing its own crisis of legitimacy.
The movie studios, the cable and broadcast channels, and the producers and creators who feed them stories don’t just represent a constellation of talent or competing agglomerations of corporate power. They also constitute an Establishment, an elite devoted to preserving their influence and accustomed to regarding their constituents with a mixture of entitlement, sincere concern and condescension.
Like the political establishment, the entertainment establishment has become skilled at deploying the language of populism, often against a phantom counter-elite of critics and other skeptics. Armies of angry fans can be deployed to defend fragile superheroes. Fantasies of individual power and collective victimhood are marketed to flatter obedient ticket buyers with the conviction that they are masters rather than minions, underdogs rather than lackeys. Audiences show up, sometimes with real enthusiasm, though more often with a weary sense of civic obligation. Occasionally the clouds of cynicism part, and the promise of pop culture appears reborn. This happens more with television than with large-scale commercial cinema, but the crowd-pleasing, critically embraced blockbusters of 2015 — “Creed,” “Mad Max: Fury Road,” “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” and even “Jurassic World” — suggested that there was some life left in the old machinery. Or even that the system was living up to its noblest possibilities.
This year at the movies has been much drearier. You might be forgiven for feeling, to borrow a slogan from an insurgent political campaign, that the game is rigged. “Captain America: Civil War,” “X-Men: Apocalypse” and even the hapless “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice” all had their weekends of box-office domination. But did anyone really care about them? Did they have anything to say?
Actually, they did. “Batman v Superman” and “Captain America: Civil War” both used internecine conflicts among superheroes to stage parallel pseudo-political debates. The question dividing both the Marvel and DC crews — pitting Bruce Wayne against Clark Kent and Iron Man against the patriotic Captain — was whether superpowers should be checked or regulated in any way. Iron Man, in civilian life Tony Stark, a billionaire munitions mogul, argued that the Avengers should answer to the United Nations. Steve Rogers, a loyal creature of the American military, recoiled at the idea of global bureaucrats interfering with the group’s world-protecting mission. A similar conflict played out, in a more personal vein, between Batman and Superman, with Batman (manipulated by Lex Luthor) worrying that Superman’s Kryptonian abilities made him a potential threat to the very public order he had always sworn to defend.
While the movies pursued these quarrels with varying degrees of nuance and conviction — and with lots of fighting, flying and large-scale digitally confected destruction — both were sympathetic to the let-superheroes-be-superheroes point of view. This is just genre boilerplate, in a way, but it also confirms that at present the genre’s default ideology is a variant of the masters-of-the-universe libertarianism that energizes some of the most vocal sectors of the American ruling class. The supermen are doing good, and they know what’s good for us, and they have never needed pusillanimous institutions — the cops, the press, the government — to tell them what to do. What they need is the support and gratitude of the masses, and when they don’t get that affirmation, they can get a little sulky.
The superhero franchise movies can be interpreted as psychological case studies of the powerful, but they are also defenses of power. Their protagonists see themselves as outsiders, as rebels against weak or corrupt civic authority, and at the same time as avatars of a more benevolent and less accountable form of strength, whose exercise is justified by the absolute evil they must combat. This kind of politics has a precise name, one that’s been rather astonishingly bandied about during the Republican primary season. But I’m not going to call Captain America a fascist. Not yet anyway.
I will say, though, that the top-down moral structure of the superhero universe — in which the battles of good guys and bad guys relegate the rest of humanity to the status of victims, spectators and abstractions in whose name the wars are supposedly fought — is not so different from what peeks out amid the hectic pseudo-realism of Beltway- or Westeros-centric TV. The focus of interest in both cases is on the forms and procedures of politics, the behind-the-scenes scheming and public grandstanding that determines who controls what.
Missing is the actual content of politics. Olivia Pope may have worked for and slept with a Republican president, and Frank Underwood may be a Democrat, but their political positions are the fuzziest and least interesting aspects of their personalities. Selina Meyer is wildly indiscreet about everything but her partisan affiliation, which remains unstated after five seasons. The news media may thrive on polarization, but the entertainment establishment has not given up on the old American Dream of consensus. The sex lives of fictional politicians can be even naughtier than the real thing, but race, class, religion and the other hot buttons and third rails are handled with nervous smiles and kid gloves.
Occasionally you can catch a glimpse of such issues, though more often on family sitcoms (like “black-ish” or “The Middle”) than in overtly political narratives. And movies have tried, with varying success, to capture some of the rage at Wall Street that Bernie Sanders articulated during the primaries. “The Big Short” managed to mix a dollop of indignation into its comic-thriller treatment of the 2008 financial meltdown. Jodie Foster’s “Money Monster,” starring George Clooney and Julia Roberts, tried to express some sympathy for the little guy who walks into a television studio with a gun, demanding that his grievances against predatory capitalists be heard.
But his anger was the least convincing part of that film, which was much more comfortable contemplating the resilience and distress of its stars. Ms. Roberts and Mr. Clooney were, after all, playing benevolent establishment figures, willing to preserve their own influence by using it (in ethically ambiguous ways) for the common good.
So far, only one movie this year has tried to present a vision of what it might look like if ordinary people acted in their own interests. That would be “Free State of Jones,” which in spite of taking place more than 150 years ago has quite a lot to say about the current state of things. It’s not a perfect movie by any means, but it does wade right into the thickets of race and class in its depiction of the alliance between escaped slaves and Confederate deserters in Civil War Mississippi. The whites, mostly poor farmers who don’t own slaves, are not in the same boat as their black comrades, but the two groups share a common interest and a common enemy. Their alliance is doomed, but in tracing its brief history, “Free State of Jones,” directed by Gary Ross and made in consultation with leading experts in the period, grazes a number of other political matters. It’s about gun ownership and church attendance and marriage equality. It’s intersectional! There’s something for everyone to embrace or find problematic.
Except that nobody wants to see it. Most of my colleagues dismissed “Free State of Jones” in favor of that movie with Blake Lively and the shark. Audiences had other things to do, like tune into the exciting finales of “Game of Thrones” and the N.B.A. championship, a battle between Silicon Valley and the Rust Belt that was full of latent political symbolism.
So maybe the status quo is stronger than it looks. (This may be true in politics as well.) The establishment shows no signs of cracking, and no popular uprising seems to be gathering on the horizon to threaten its power. Is that an encouraging thought or a disheartening one? Or just a mistake?
