BATON ROUGE, La. — Bringing a wildly unpredictable election cycle to an unsurprising close, Louisiana voters on Saturday elected John Neely Kennedy, the state treasurer, to the Senate, giving Republicans a final 52-48 advantage over the Democrats.
With roughly two-thirds of the precincts reporting, Mr. Kennedy had secured 64 percent of the vote and the seat vacated by Senator David Vitter, defeating Foster Campbell, a public service commissioner long known for his populism.
Mr. Kennedy, with an anti-establishment, outsider message and a reputation as a fiscal hawk, secured a commanding position early in the race in Louisiana, which has not sent a Democrat to the Senate since 2008.
“I’m humbled and honored by the overwhelming support from all over the state,” Mr. Kennedy said on Saturday. “Louisiana voters sent a clear message tonight and I’m ready to go to Washington, D.C., to fight for our people.”
Mr. Campbell had received unwavering support from Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat, but Mr. Kennedy benefited from high-profile visits by President-elect Donald J. Trump and Vice President-elect Mike Pence.
Mr. Trump won Louisiana by 20 points and his popularity outshone other names on the state’s nonpartisan primary ballot — he received 358,000 more votes than the combined total for Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Campbell.
At a rally here on Friday for Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Trump said, “If he doesn’t win, I have myself a problem in Washington. It’s close.” He later added, “If John’s not there, maybe we can’t build the wall.”
Democrats had hoped the Louisiana race would give them an opportunity to thin the Republican margin in the Senate.
“We left no stone unturned,” Mr. Campbell said in his concession speech. “I make no excuses. We did everything humanly possible.”
Some Democrats saw it as a last stand in a dismal year capped by Hillary Clinton’s defeat. Some celebrities, including the actor John Leguizamo and the comedian Patton Oswalt, took to Twitter and asked people to donate, and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts made an appeal, as well.
“Republicans here and around the nation couldn’t have had more of different outlook and reaction,” said Lionel Rainey III, Mr. Kennedy’s communications director. “This race was viewed as a final swing of the hammer into the coffin for Democrats seeking statewide office in Louisiana. It was a chance to send a message.”
But the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee steered clear of the race. After Mr. Edwards’ surprise victory in the governor’s race last year over Mr. Vitter, Democratic leaders believed they could have replicated those 2015 successes had there been more outside help.
Managing the runoff in classic front-runner fashion, Mr. Kennedy turned down debates and positioned himself as a stalwart conservative. Mr. Campbell attacked his opponent on his Democratic and pro-choice past, but Mr. Kennedy kept a lead in the polls.
“I peg him as a thinker, somebody who will bring to the Senate a great deal of insight and a strong understanding of the nuances of Louisiana, a conservative who can continue the legacy of David Vitter,” said State Representative Paul Hollis, a Republican.
The popularity of Mr. Trump’s brand of politics in the state also surfaced in the Third Congressional District, the Cajun heel of Louisiana’s boot that has produced some of the state’s most colorful and well-known populist politicians. Clay Higgins, a former police captain who gained fame online as the “Cajun John Wayne,” had claimed 56 percent of the vote there with nearly all of the precincts reporting, toppling Scott Angelle, a fellow Republican who was heavily favored to win.
