On April 12 last year, Hillary Clinton formally announced her run for the presidency by posting a two-­minute video on YouTube. For the first minute and a half, Clinton was nowhere to be seen. Instead, the video showed a montage of a dozen or so Clinton supporters: a ­middle-­aged white woman tending to her garden; two Hispanic brothers starting a business; a pregnant young black woman and her husband unpacking boxes in a sun-­dappled suburban living room; a burly, bullet-headed white man surveying an American-­flag-­draped warehouse.
It was a carefully constructed portrait of the American middle class, or the parts of it that tend to vote Democratic — like the patchwork of Carhartt and Ann Taylor that Barack Obama gathered around himself for a speech in Cincinnati early in the 2012 campaign, when he proclaimed himself a “warrior for the middle class.” American politicians genuflect toward the middle class so reflexively that failing to do so in a speech or a statement about the economy seems almost heretical — which it turned out was the most remarkable thing about Clinton’s video.
When the candidate materialized, she instead said this: “Everyday Americans need a champion — and I want to be that champion.” Her omission of “middle class” was intentional. Amy Chozick of The New York Times wrote that the campaign planned to “shy away from the characterization ‘middle class’ — because, her advisers say, the term no longer connotes a stable life — and instead use the term ‘everyday Americans.’ ”
Joel Benenson, Clinton’s chief strategist and Obama’s lead pollster, has thought a great deal about issues of class. In 2011, he embarked on an extensive project in which researchers conducted repeated interviews with about 100 middle-­income, middle-­aged swing voters in the suburbs of Columbus, Ohio; Denver; and Orlando, Fla. “It’s been valuable,” he told me recently, “because it’s important to know what kind of conventional assumptions about the middle class hold up and which don’t. There’s no question that there was a massive recalibration after the financial crash. People felt very strongly that the foundations — what they had believed they would achieve by working hard, doing things right — were not the same as they had been before.” Public-­opinion surveys, too, show that something has shifted, sharply, in the American self-­definition. Last spring, a Gallup poll found that the percentage of respondents who identified as middle class or upper middle class dropped 12 percent since the 2008 financial crisis; nearly half of those polled identified themselves as either working or lower class.
But Clinton’s use of “everyday Americans” proved to be short-­lived, perhaps because of its undeniably leaden ring. (Has anyone but Sly Stone ever self-identified as “everyday”?) By September, Clinton had dropped the phrase entirely. Campaign officials conceded to The Times that it was confusing and, maybe, a bit too close to Walmart’s “Everyday Low Prices.”
The whole episode revealed a fundamental tension underlying this year’s anomalous presidential contest. America’s self-­image as a middle-­class nation is so deeply ingrained in the country’s politics that we don’t often stop to think what, precisely, that means: whether it defines a concrete socioeconomic identity — a country where most people are neither very rich nor very poor — or an aspiration, the notion that if you “work hard and play by the rules,” as Clinton put it the first time she ran for president, you’re entitled to at least a modest prosperity. “Everyday Americans” was an attempt to acknowledge that the gap between these two ideas has widened to the point that ignoring it seems out of touch. Yet in its reversal, the campaign inadvertently revealed just how ill ­equipped American politics is for a post-­middle-­class nation — how deeply the way the country speaks of itself is tied up with these aspirations, even as more and more of its citizens come to see them as out of reach.
During Donald Trump’s ascent in the polls last fall, the most confounding question in politics was who, exactly, his supporters were. A couple of weeks before the New Hampshire primary in February, Byron York, a journalist well sourced among Republican operatives, crisscrossed the state asking party grandees: “Do you know anyone who supports Donald Trump?” “In more cases than not,” he wrote in The Washington Examiner, “actually, in nearly all the cases, the answer was no.”
As the first election results and exit polls came in, Trump’s voters seemed to be mostly high-­school-­educated white men, mostly making less than $50,000 a year. Perhaps more surprising, this description also fits, with some tailoring, the voters who have propelled the candidacy of Bernie Sanders. In mostly white New Hampshire, Sanders beat Clinton among voters making less than $50,000 a year by a staggering 33 percentage points — twice as big as his margin with voters who made more than that — and by 36 percentage points among voters without college degrees. In Michigan, whose suburban voters are one of the most-­watched barometers in American politics, the margins were narrower but still notable: Sanders won white voters without a college degree by 15 percentage points, and voters making less than $50,000 by 3 percentage points.
These insurgent candidates are capturing one of the two demographic groups that converged in the great middle-­class experiment that began seven decades ago. When people spoke of the middle class in the years immediately after World War II, they were typically talking about the group identified by the sociologist C.Wright Mills in his 1951 book, “White Collar”: the usually college-­educated, deskbound employees of a newly technocratic, corporate economy. It was only a few years later that the definition was generally extended to include skilled blue-­collar workers, who were now earning solid incomes on account of a booming postwar industrial economy and of unions that made sure their members got an equitable piece of it.
The confluence of these two groups — a vision of insurance salesmen and machine operators, mowing the lawns of adjoining split-­level ranches and talking about Sunday’s game — felt extraordinary even in its own time, seemingly incontrovertible proof that American capitalism worked. “The fact is that America’s booming new middle-­income class consists, to a startling extent, of groups hitherto identified as proletarians,” Fortune reported in 1954. Instead of overthrowing the bourgeoisie, the proletariat had joined it.
The new middle-­class utopia did, of course, exclude most nonwhite Americans. Although average incomes for nonwhites increased at about the same rate as incomes for whites in the postwar years, in 1959 the black poverty rate was still 56 percent, and blacks on average earned 53 percent what whites did. What could be said for the midcentury middle class, though, is that it generally worked astonishingly well for those who were lucky enough to be part of it — particularly for blue-­collar workers. Probably no one in American history has achieved prosperity with the velocity of the men who grew up destitute in the Depression and, by their 30s, had factory jobs that paid (in 2016 dollars) upward of $50,000 a year.
The white- and blue-­collar middle classes each tended to vote Democratic, which made sense: The new middle class’s good fortune was the combined product of the New Deal, postwar Keynesian economic policy, the G.I. Bill, organized labor and government-­backed mortgages. But in retrospect, the Democrats’ hold on the white middle class was balanced precariously on the racial status quo — which, by the mid-­1960s, was breaking apart. George Wallace, the segregationist Democratic governor of Alabama who ran for president in 1964 in protest of Lyndon B. Johnson’s turn toward civil rights, performed well not just in the South but also in white blue-­collar enclaves in the few Northern states where he was on the primary ballot. When he ran again as an independent in 1968, the members of the United Auto Workers Union local at the General Motors plant in Flint, Mich., voted to endorse him.
By 1984, the extent of the damage to the Democrats’ postwar coalition had become clear. That spring, Ronald Reagan’s campaign aired its “Morning in America” ad, a Vaseline-­lensed montage of overwhelmingly white suburban prosperity. Walter Mondale — the son of a small-­town Minnesota minister whose politics radiated an austere, Scandinavian morality — spent the last days of his campaign unfurling increasingly dire pictures of urban and rural poverty and beseeching people to vote for an “America of fairness.” Speaking bitterly of Reagan’s commercial, he told a crowd at a church in Cleveland: “It’s all picket fences and puppy dogs. No one’s hurting. No one’s alone. No one’s hungry. No one’s unemployed. No one gets old. Everybody’s happy.” But Americans liked the picket fences and puppy dogs. Reagan swept every state in the country save Minnesota and the District of Columbia.
Not long afterward, Stanley Greenberg, a 40-­year-­old Yale political scientist who moonlighted as a political pollster, was contacted by a group of Democratic Party and union officials in Michigan. They asked him to help explain what had happened that November in Macomb County outside Detroit. In 1960, Macomb voted for John F. Kennedy by a larger margin than any suburban county in the country. In 1984, it voted for Reagan by a margin of 33 percentage points. “The sense was that if we could figure out what happened in Macomb County, Democrats would go a long way toward righting the ship,” Rick Wiener, the chairman of the Michigan Democratic Party at the time, told me recently.
In one sense, what had happened was obvious. The postwar suburbs in general had been a racial fortress, their homogeneity enforced by a web of government policies and unofficial restrictions making it difficult for nonwhites to own property in them, and few more so than Detroit’s. The white ex-­Democrats whom Greenberg’s team interviewed, he later wrote, “expressed a profound distaste for black Americans, a sentiment that pervaded almost everything they thought about government and politics. Blacks constituted the explanation for their vulnerability and for almost everything that had gone wrong in their lives; not being black was what constituted being middle class.”
Still, Greenberg noted, Macomb voters had not defected en masse from the Democratic Party until after years of worsening economic circumstances — and until they perceived the Democrats as not only having taken up the banner of the urban poor and nonwhites but also having abandoned the white middle class. “These voters wondered why they weren’t the central drama of the Democratic Party,” Greenberg wrote. Greenberg suggested that Democrats offer a kind of grand bargain to the white middle-­class voters he called “Reagan Democrats”: The Democrats would reinstate the middle class as the gravitational center of the party’s economic policy if those voters accepted an expanded definition of who was included in the middle class.
Among the Democrats who took Greenberg’s advice was Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who used the Macomb study as the playbook for his 1992 presidential campaign, which he built around the theme of “the forgotten middle class.” Speaking to voters in Macomb County in March 1992, he offered a near-­verbatim recitation of Greenberg’s proposal: “The one thing that it’s going to take to bring this country together is somebody’s got to come back to the so-­called Reagan Democratic area and say: ‘Look, I’ll give you your values back. I’ll restore the economic leadership, I’ll help you build the middle class back.’ But you’ve got to say, ‘O.K., let’s do it with everybody in this country.’ ”
You can see, in Clinton’s 1992 campaign, the basic architecture of how politicians, and many Americans, talk about the middle class today — not just the more diverse picture of American prosperity that politicians of both parties must at least pay lip service to, but also a more expansive economic definition of what the middle class is. In the first year of his presidency, Clinton created a new top income-­tax bracket, starting at $250,000 (nearly $420,000 in today’s dollars). This is as close as we have to a concrete upper bound for what counts, in political discourse, as the middle class; the “middle class” tax policies of Obama, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders all apply to earners with incomes of $250,000 or less.
Bill Clinton was acknowledging, presciently, a skewing of the American economy that has only worsened since his presidency, the steady pulling away of the superrich from everyone else — the division between the 99 percent and the 1 percent. But the more politically meaningful divergence may be one happening further down the economic spectrum. Richard V. Reeves, a scholar at the Brookings Institution, argues that the most significant dividing line in recent American experience isn’t between the 99 percent and the 1 percent, but between the 80 percent and the 20 percent — a group that includes not just the very rich but also people most Americans would identify as upper middle class. This is where you draw the line if you’re interested not in absolute wealth but in the trajectory of wealth — not whether you have a yacht docked in St. Bart’s, but whether you’re doing better than you were five years ago.
If the phrase “everyday Americans” tried to preserve a sense of common identity while acknowledging the fragmented economic realities of the 21st-­century middle class, it also demonstrated just how difficult that is to do. Consider the different experiences of two groups that sit mostly within what the Democrats’ tax policies, at least, define as the middle class: The top 20 percent saw its average real household income rise to $185,000 in 2013 from about $109,000 a year in 1967. The middle 40 percent saw their real incomes rise, too, but to only $68,000 from $52,000 — the equivalent of a $348-­a-­year raise. The top 20 percent is also more likely than the middle 40 percent to believe that hard work gets you ahead in life.
Fissures have also deepened between the two halves of the postwar middle class: between college-­educated, mostly white-­collar workers and high-­school-­educated, mostly blue-­collar workers. According to a Brookings study released last year, men and women with bachelor’s degrees earned a median of 7 percent and 16 percent more in 2013 than they did in 1990. Women who either didn’t attend college or attended but didn’t graduate made just 3 percent more — up to a meager $29,500 — and those men made 13 percent less: a median of $40,700 a year, down from $47,100 a year.
The aspirational idea of the middle class spoke to the notion that even if Americans were in various stages of prosperity, they were all understood to be heading in the same general direction. But what happens when that’s no longer true? On one end of the “middle class” spectrum is a dream inexorably receding from view; on the other is a pair of socioeconomic blinders obscuring the harsher economic realities of those further down the scale. “The upper middle class are surprised by the rise of Trump,” Reeves told me. “The actual middle class are surprised we’re surprised.”
