The 17th annual Latin Grammy Awards broadcast started with a postelection statement: “Tu Enemigo” (“Your Enemy”). It’s a duet, originally released in 2015, by Pablo López, from Spain, and Juanes, from Colombia, with lyrics that reject the demonization of immigrants. “Don’t ask me what I came for/Better ask yourself how you got here,” Juanes sang, backed by a white-robed choir and a team of drummers while Cirque du Soleil aerialists writhed overhead.
But glitter, romance and rhythm, not social consciousness, were the staples of the awards show, broadcast on Thursday on Univision from the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas. Speeches were brief, and performances were plentiful at this showcase for a broad spectrum of Latin music. (Not all of it, however: Brazilian music, which has its own categories among the awards, was absent as usual from prime time.)
Two top awards, record of the year and song of the year, went to the song “La Bicicleta” (“The Bicycle”), a duet by perennial Latin Grammy winners from Colombia: Shakira (who didn’t attend) and Carlos Vives, who was on hand to perform it, and to thank Colombia’s cyclists. The album of the year, begrudged by no one, was a posthumous award for “Los Dúo 2” by Juan Gabriel, the prolific, beloved Mexican singer and songwriter who died in August. It was also named best traditional pop vocal album, while a collection of salsa versions of his songs, “Intensamente,” won the salsa album award for the singer India.
The event’s centerpiece was a charged performance by Marc Anthony, the Nuyorican salsa dynamo who was the Latin Grammys’ person of the year. After he sang three of his own hits, he was joined for a duet by his ex-wife, Jennifer Lopez. She sang most of her new single, “Olvídame y Pega la Vuelta” (“Forget Me and Turn Around”), a ferocious post-breakup song that was a 1984 hit for an Argentine duo, Pimpinela. She then gave a fervent speech praising Mr. Anthony, handed him the person of the year trophy and shared a peck of a kiss on the mouth with him that cascaded across social media.
Multicultural partnerships have spread across Latin pop, and the Latin Grammys featured live versions of recent studio combinations. The Dominican-American singer Prince Royce shared a Dominican-style bachata with the Mexican-American singer Gerardo Ortíz, usually a norteño singer. J Balvin, a reggaeton singer from Colombia, performed his insinuating hit “Safari” with his American collaborators, the producer and singer Pharrell Williams and the singer BIA. Farruko, from Puerto Rico, shared his risqué, bilingual reggae song “Chillax” with Ky-Mani Marley, one of Bob Marley’s sons, from Jamaica.
Fonseca, the Colombian singer and songwriter who won an award for best cumbia/vallenato album, shared a performance of “Vine a Buscarte,” which was named best tropical song, with the Puerto Rican reggaeton duo Alexis & Fido. The American songwriter Rachel Platten merged her determinedly reassuring hit “Stand By You” with its Spanish remake, “Siempre Estaré Ahí,” a duet with the Argentine songwriter Diego Torres. And Juanes reappeared to play guitar with a gutsy, tattooed rockabilly-tinged Chilean singer, Mon Laferte. She was nominated as best new artist, although the award went to the Colombian singer-songwriter Manuel Medrano.
Las Vegas dancers shimmied alongside the separate efforts of Wisin and Yandel, a longtime Puerto Rican reggaeton duo; Yandel’s “Encantadora” won three awards. And there was unchoreographed rock rowdiness from Los Fabulosos Cadillacs, an Argentine ska and rock band formed in 1985 that won best rock album and best rock song. It ended its performance with the bassist smashing his instrument onstage and a squeal of feedback.
Yet tucked into the show, there were also more earnest moments. Three distinguished Mexican singers who have joined forces as Las Tres Grandes — Eugenia León, Tania Libertad and Guadalupe Pineda — sang about women’s pride and determination in a tradition-rooted son jarocho “Mi Canto Viene del Sur” (“My Song Comes From the South”).
And when Jesse & Joy, who had earlier performed a pristinely heartbroken version of “Me Soltaste,” collected their award for best contemporary pop vocal album, Joy grew teary. She dedicated the award to her parents, and then, she continued, “to all the Latins in this country and all the communities of minorities.”
