Is it wrongful “cultural appropriation” when authors invent characters unlike themselves?
To the Editor:
Re “Will the Left Survive Millennials?,” by Lionel Shriver (Op-Ed, Sept. 23):
As a struggling playwright often accused of appropriating other cultures, and recently denied a reading of a script about the trial of a radical Islamic desecrater of art, I was delighted to read Lionel Shriver’s impassioned defense of freedom of expression. If the great evolutionary triumph of our species is the capacity to reason and understand, then for millennials to define themselves strictly in terms of their race, age, gender or ethnicity is to be forever stranded on a smaller planet. When we allow anyone of any age to police our imaginations, to condemn us to writing plays, poems and novels only about people like ourselves, then we’re doomed as artists and humanists. The best thing about our capacity for abstract thinking is that it allows us to imagine what it’s like to be someone else (saint or sinner), and might help us become more empathetic. Why can’t the taking on of symbols of other cultures, like the sombrero, flip flops and berets, be considered a tribute, not a mockery? But even as a mockery, are we no longer allowed to laugh at ourselves and others? Why can’t we celebrate our differences?
FENGAR GAEL

New York
To the Editor: As a writer, a millennial and a teacher of millennials, I am disappointed by Lionel Shriver’s position on cultural appropriation in fiction. Writers certainly may create a character who does not look like them, and there is a long history of this, from Chaucer’s Wife of Bath to Toni Morrison’s white Fisher family. But readers are under no obligation to applaud the attempt. This is particularly true at a time when writers of color and working-class writers are still underrepresented in the publishing world. To my mind, the endless haranguing of millennials by older, self-described liberals shows that the social unrest of the 1960s ended in compromises that millennials inherited but not did choose. If young activists have exposed a conflict between progress toward social justice and self-satisfied leftism, is “the left” an idea worth saving anymore?
ERIC WEISKOTT

Brookline, Mass.
To the Editor: William Shakespeare never personally felt the sting of racism, yet he wrote the character of Othello. He was never subjected to anti-Semitism, yet he wrote the character of Shylock. Nor was he ever a female adolescent, yet he wrote the character of Juliet. And we are all the richer for it. Artists must be free to create characters that lie within the scope of their imaginations, not merely to replicate their own identities, because great art allows us to transcend those identities and recognize our common humanity. To be sure, no artist has the right to expect immunity from criticism. But thoughtful criticism should be based on the quality of the creation, not the racial, religious, sexual or class identity of the creator.
J.B. ALEXANDER

Jackson Heights, Queens
The writer is an actor and playwright.
To the Editor: “Will the Left Survive Millennials?” paints my generation with too broad a brush. As a millennial sympathetic to the writer’s position, I want to offer a few words in our defense. While members of the “radical left” are highly vocal, they hardly speak for our whole generation. At Penn State, where I am a student, the vast majority of my peers seek out, rather than shy away from, differing opinions. Most of us recognize that confronting the issues facing our country will require a public discourse that empowers all Americans to contribute their opinions, ideas and perspectives — and this means welcoming people with different beliefs as much as it means welcoming people with different backgrounds. There are plenty of millennials who see enforced political correctness as a threat to this kind of inclusive dialogue. The fact that these reasonable voices are drowned out by a vocal minority does not justify writing off our entire generation.
BRENDAN BERNICKER

University Park, Pa.
To the Editor: Can a white person write about the black experience? I once lent a black friend a copy of “Clockers,” by Richard Price. He loved it and asked: “Who is this brother, Richard Price? I never heard of him.” I told him that he’s a white Jew. Only after seeing his picture did he believe me.
WILLIAM M. GORDON

Upper Montclair, N.J.
To the Editor: I’m sorry that Lionel Shriver feels that millennials have censored her so completely that she can be published only in such obscure places as the Op-Ed section of The New York Times. She calls fiction a “vital vehicle for empathy,” which is all very admirable, but she doesn’t spare much empathy for Yassmin Abdel-Magied, who walked out of her speech in anger.
No one is saying Ms. Shriver should be put in jail or that it should be illegal to publish a book she writes from the perspective of an oppressed person of color or some other position about which she can have little personal experience. In the same vein, it shouldn’t be illegal for me to post an article about how that reflects on her, and suggesting that other people join me in not reading it. If I criticize what she says it’s censorship, but not when she criticizes how I said it?
Ms. Shriver asks, “But do we really want every intellectual conversation to be scrupulously cleansed of any whiff of controversy?” If she thinks millennials avoid discussing controversial topics, I guess she just doesn’t know a lot of millennials.
UMA BHAGWAT GAFFNEY
Northampton, Mass.
The writer is a member of the class of 2020 at Smith College.
To the Editor: I’ve had productions and readings of several of my plays that incorporated controversial dialogue about race and gender. Some of my most valued praise came from people who said, “I hated that character and everything he stood for, but you forced me to see things from a point of view I would have never considered.” Sadly, I don’t know if I’d even be brave enough to have those works sent out in today’s explosive cultural climate. And as writers, as people, how are we supposed to forge any kind of common voice if we make no effort to explore or understand others’ point of view, through the art we make, or by asking controversial questions, or by helping one another overcome mistakes instead of coming after those we feel have made them with virtual pitchforks? If only all the energy fueling the ever-roaring rage machine of social media were put into making this a more just, equitable and compassionate society.
JUDY CHICUREL
Brooklyn
To the Editor: Instead of being grumpy at millennials for pushing racial discourse to a place where it becomes uncomfortable for whites, Lionel Shriver should embrace this moment as the “second wave” of the civil rights movement. The purpose of this dialogue is not to shut down ideas or speech, but rather to instruct white people as to how we can collectively dismantle institutionalized racism. We have no idea what it is like to live as a person of color in 2016, and so we must just sit, listen, learn and then do. I expect that in another 30 to 50 years, there will be yet another generational shift, one that calls for the dismantling of racial identity altogether. I just hope when that happens, I will be wise enough to recognize it and humble enough to embrace it wholeheartedly.
CALLIE GALE HEILMANN

Bridgeport, Conn.

To the Editor: Yes, Lionel Shriver, the left (whatever that means today) will survive the millennials. They are so humorless and becoming so boring and predictable that at some point the body politic will just shrug them off. Even among liberals indignation fatigue has already set in.
ALMA SUZIN FLESCH

New York
