When Donald J. Trump’s campaign recently began to enroll “election observers” to monitor the vote this November, the news media reacted with shocked surprise. Politico called the move “unprecedented in a presidential election,” and others predicted that it could lead to voter intimidation, or worse, at the polls.
But we don’t have to guess at what partisan election observers might look like. There’s a long history of such behavior at American elections, much of it quite ugly. At an 1859 election in Baltimore, “challengers” snatched ballots from voters, sparking citywide riots that left two dozen beaten, four stabbed and eight shot. The Baltimore Sun complained that many citizens considered such violence “ordinary incidents of a popular election.”
They were right: Intimidation and violence were a regular part of the electoral process. We’ve come a long way, for sure — but with angry partisanship and even political violence on the rise, it’s worth asking what happened, and how we can avoid the same thing today.
The Constitution sets out no rules for how Americans should vote, so throughout our history political parties have improvised. As America expanded the right to vote during the 1800s, most states adopted mass-distributed paper ballots, but left it to the parties to print those ballots and get them into the wooden ballot boxes sitting in town squares or saloons.
This was an era of highly contested politics. On Election Day most men in a community gathered around the ballot box, turning the polling place into an awkward combination of a town hall and a fraternity gantlet. (Women mostly stayed home that day, and black men, when they could vote, tended to do so early in the morning.)
But for all that America did to enfranchise unprecedented numbers of citizens, there was no comprehensive way of keeping track of them. With few records and mass migration, voters struggled to prove that they were legal. Partisans could not escape the feeling — often accurate — that the other side was stealing the vote. So competing organizations began to “police the polls.”
Almost immediately, peaceful observers took the next logical step, intimidating those who might support the wrong ticket. They stationed themselves in front of ballot boxes, occasionally leaning on them. They scanned approaching voters, trying to predict their politics.
When challengers spotted a man they thought shouldn’t be voting, they could turn to an election judge who might intervene. Or they could intimidate the voter directly: One cartoon about a first-time voter joked that, in casting his “virgin vote,” the young man was “sworn in a little, and sworn at considerably.”
There were nastier ways to guard the polls. “Knockdowns” of voters holding the wrong ticket were common, as were “awlings,” in which challengers stabbed potential voters with a shoemaker’s awl. And there were always revolvers, shotguns and even occasionally cannons, which turned some Reconstruction-era polling places into scenes we might expect to see in a Western movie or a developing democracy.
More than any other aspect of the voting process, this culture of vote “challenging” frustrated American reformers. A series of initiatives in the 1880s finally began to clean up what activists called “rowdyism at those palladiums of our liberty.” Government-printed ballots replaced “vote hustlers” distributing party tickets, registration laws kept track of who should vote, and closing saloons on Election Day dried out tipsy crowds. By the 20th century, vote challenging was no longer common in most Northern elections.
In the South, however, Jim Crow laws wrapped the worst aspects of voter intimidation in state power. In the 1870s, white citizens took it upon themselves to police the polls, threatening black voters and helping crush Reconstruction. By the 20th century, literacy laws, poll taxes and grandfather clauses kept a vast majority of Southern African-Americans from registering or voting. Many of these laws persisted, quite publicly, into the 1960s.
Measures like the Voting Rights Act ushered in a more equitable, peaceful era in American elections. In the 21st century, though, we seem willing to cast off the restraints that society designed to clean up politics over the last century — a trend into which private, partisan election observers fit perfectly.
To be fair, it doesn’t automatically follow that such observers will return Election Day to its violent, chaotic past — they could even enliven our polling places, which since have become colorless affairs, far from the public gatherings of the mid-19th century. Maybe we should all be observing our elections.
America has reached a critical moment of re-evaluation of our democracy — new ideas are welcome. But we are working within a very old and well-documented political system, and have plenty of experience with democratic innovations. So we might occasionally pause to look back at what worked, and what didn’t. We tried election observers. There’s a reason we left them in the past.
