Early this year, when a string of primary victories established Donald Trump as a viable presidential candidate and making sense of him became a matter of some national urgency, one of the more incisive assessments came from Newt Gingrich. At a closed-door meeting of the Republican State Leadership Committee in February, Gingrich argued that Trump was not a conservative but rather an “American nationalist” — one whose success suggested he had found “a formula worthy of study.” He noted how Trump seemed bent on not just vanquishing his rivals but on eviscerating them. “He’s the grizzly bear in the room,” Gingrich said. “He’s not normal.”
There was a game-recognize-game aspect to this, coming from Gingrich, a genuinely eccentric politician who long ago sublimated his weirder tendencies into canny partisan street fighting. Trump, Gingrich said, needed to adapt similarly, tempering his instincts with the kind of restrained, hopeful messaging that might persuade a general-election audience. “If he and his team understand this,” Gingrich said, “I suspect they will evolve rapidly.”
It is difficult to remember now, not even half a year later, but for a moment this spring, after Trump cleared the Republican field, this was one of his opponents’ greatest fears: that Trump — aided by a Republican Party mindful of its future and a political media seeking balanced campaign narratives — would remake himself as a disciplined, moderate candidate, and voters would believe it. “My campaign is not going to let Donald Trump try to normalize himself,” Hillary Clinton vowed in May.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines “normalize” as “to make normal; to bring or return to a normal or standard condition or state.” It’s a word, then, as nebulous and conditional as the idea of normalcy itself — and one whose many meanings have been debated throughout a campaign season of unusual self-scrutiny within America’s professional political class.
It was possible, in the early days of Trump’s probable nomination, to imagine his general-election campaign unfolding as a radical experiment, a test of the political system’s ability to coax a candidate who had shredded the country’s civic norms back toward the median. But Trump, of course, would not be coaxed — and still, his poll numbers were, until recently, only a few points shy of where Mitt Romney, a candidate who was normal to the point of abnormality, stood at the same junctures in 2012.
Which has left us to consider a much darker question: whether our definition of “normal” politics has been irretrievably altered by Trump, rather than vice versa. “I think one of the greatest dangers of Donald Trump,” Stuart Stevens, Romney’s 2012 campaign manager, told CNN’s Anderson Cooper in May, “is the idea that he might normalize a speech and an attitude that as a group in America we have decided is unacceptable.” Whether or not Trump loses on Tuesday, it’s likely that nearly half of American voters will have decided that what he represents isn’t so unacceptable after all.
The hand-wringing over Trump’s normalization began in earnest in the wake of the May 4 Indiana primary victory that drove the last of his serious Republican rivals from the race, which in retrospect was the moment his normalization became all but inevitable. The day after the primary, Vox’s David Roberts predicted that within the “whole superstructure of U.S. politics built around two balanced sides” — the media, consultants, parties and the like — “there will be a tidal pull to normalize this election, to make it Coca-Cola versus Pepsi instead of Coca-Cola versus sewer water.”
But since then, reporters have proved more blunt in their assessments of Trump, and many Republicans and conservative intellectuals more principled in their dissent, than the pessimists expected. The superstructure might not have fully escaped the gravitational forces that Roberts described, but it’s not clear how much it could have once Trump appeared to have sealed the nomination. Could journalists defensibly refuse to cover, or Republicans defensibly refuse to nominate, the clear winner of a plurality of the party’s primary votes? As MSNBC’s Chris Hayes commiserated with the conservative talk-radio host Charlie Sykes last month, Trump “has marched through all the normal institutions we have, and in some ways that can’t help but be normalizing.”
As this has become clearer, the arguments over how, and by whom, Trump was normalized have become backward-looking ones. The Republican strategist Rick Wilson recently tweeted a Times graphic showing that Trump had received an estimated $1.9 billion worth of free media coverage — nearly nine times what Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio each received and two and a half times what Clinton received — with the words: “Never forget. There was no movement. The media handed him this on a plate.”
Wilson’s not wrong. A Shorenstein Center survey of eight major print and broadcast outlets (including The Times) found that between June and December 2015, Trump received more than a third of all the coverage devoted to Republican presidential candidates — more than Bush and Rubio combined. If this reflects Trump’s status as, in the Shorenstein report’s words, “arguably the first bona fide media-created presidential nominee,” it also reflects a self-interest that media executives have at times not even bothered to conceal. “The money’s rolling in, and this is fun,” Les Moonves, chairman of CBS, said in February. “It’s a terrible thing to say. But bring it on, Donald. Keep going.” Perhaps no single person enabled, and benefited from, Trump’s political ascent more than the president of CNN, Jeff Zucker, who as head of NBC Entertainment greenlit “The Apprentice” and in his current role is reportedly anticipating $100 million in extra profits thanks to CNN’s wall-to-wall Trump coverage.
But then how do you explain Bernie Sanders? The Vermont senator won 22 states in the Democratic primary with less media coverage than either Bush or Rubio and more negative coverage than Trump. This year, the failings of the country’s elites, political and otherwise, unleashed in both parties forces that were beyond those elites’ control — but in only one party did they take the form of a political revolt that sanctions white nationalism, embraces conspiracism and openly considers armed resistance and extrajudicial imprisonment of its enemies. When Senator Mark Kirk of Illinois, who once described Trump as “too bigoted and racist” to be president, impugns the patriotic bona fides of his opponent, Tammy Duckworth, by invoking her Asian ancestry, it’s absurd to pretend that these things came out of nowhere.
Republican leaders own the blame for assembling the constituency and, yes, normalizing the values that made Trump’s nomination possible, and they will also own the responsibility for denormalizing Trumpism, for walking the country back from the ledge, after Nov. 8 — though how much chance they, or anybody, have of doing that is anybody’s guess. Paul Ryan, the House speaker, saw his support within his party recede overnight in October, after he dared to even slightly distance himself from Trump (without rescinding his endorsement); in one subsequent poll, 51 percent of Republicans deemed him a “weak leader.” Ryan had always implied that his endorsement of Trump had much to do with the prospects for advancing his own policy agenda in a policy-uninterested Trump administration. “We need to normalize these ideas,” he told The Washington Post earlier this year. History will probably remember him and his party for normalizing something else.
