Thanksgiving can be stressful. Extended family members often disagree on everything from who is hosting the dinner to what will be on the menu, and, for young people, there are the inevitable questions involving grades, relationships and future plans.
This year, the recent election has added another layer of stress for many families and friends who are celebrating the holiday, but not celebrating a common political viewpoint. Is it possible to have meaningful conversations and to connect with family and friends who widely disagree?
The Times has some suggestions. “How Could You? 19 Questions to Ask Loved Ones Who Voted the Other Way” asks:
The article then suggests 19 questions you can use to go deeper, including:
Students: Read all the questions, then tell us:
— Do you ever talk about politics with your family and friends? Do these conversations ever get awkward or uncomfortable? Why?
— Are politics and the recent election likely to come up during your Thanksgiving celebrations? If yes, do you think it will be stressful? Why?
– Can you see yourself using the 19-question format this holiday season? Would you like to have this conversation with anyone in particular?
— Listen to the podcast at the end of the article in which one Trump voter and one Clinton voter used this guide to facilitate conversation. Do you think Aaron and Kyle handled themselves well during the conversation? What surprised you about their discussion?
– Kyle admitted that social media postings made it easier to avoid a real conversation with Aaron over the years, and said: “I realize now that was wrong. Open dialogue is obviously what brings people together.” Do you think Aaron and Kyle would have had the same conversation without the help of the guiding questions? In your opinion, what did they do especially well during their conversation? Let us know what you think in the comments section.
If you are interested in knowing more about ways to handle difficult discussions and how to argue fairly, you might also check out “How to Argue Fairly and Without Rancor (Hello, Thanksgiving!).” 
Students 13 and older are invited to comment. All comments are moderated by the Learning Network staff, but please keep in mind that once your comment is accepted, it will be made public.
