Ready for some distraction? Chances are the national events of recent weeks have left you somewhere on the spectrum from despairing to agog to pleased as punch, and at the very least weary of all that the past year’s political campaigning has drummed up and drawn out.
Now other campaigns have descended upon us, once again, like clockwork, ones that, perhaps blessedly, are of infinitely less consequence. Welcome, dear reader, to the bubble within a bubble within a bubble of the 2017 Oscars race. Once again, for the third year running, yours truly, the Carpetbagger, will help you navigate the fray, starting with Monday night’s Gotham Independent Film Awards.
Broadly, this year’s awards season differs from years past because, as of yet, there’s no critical or box office heavy hitter — no “12 Years a Slave,” no “Birdman,” no blockbusters like “Mad Max: Fury Road,” “The Martian” or “The Revenant” — that have jumped to the fore.
Instead, smaller, quieter films — perhaps better suited for a battered populace, if not ideal for drawing audiences to the Oscars telecast — have nosed their way to the front of the race. Among them: Damien Chazelle’s wistful throwback musical, “La La Land”; Barry Jenkins’s intimate portrait of growing up poor, black and gay, “Moonlight”; Kenneth Lonergan’s beautiful tale of sorrow, “Manchester by the Sea”; and “Loving,” Jeff Nichols’ whisper-soft story of the interracial Virginia couple whose legal fight for their marriage ending up changing the law. The Weinsteins’ “Lion,” Denzel Washington’s “Fences” and Ted Melfi’s “Hidden Figures” are also in play.
There is talk in Hollywood of how the election results will affect the Oscar race. Will audiences, and Academy voters, crave uplift and escapism, avoid violent or depressing films, or search out films with a social or political message?
Already, architects of awards campaign are pitching some films as “more relevant than ever.” An opportunists’ game, perhaps, but an inevitable one. In the case of many of the documentaries — “13th,” about mass incarceration, “The Ivory Game,” about runaway poaching, “I am Not Your Negro,” about civil rights leaders and James Baldwin, and “Fire at Sea,” about an Italian island awash in refugees, there are worse things than to hope that the season will drive these pressing narratives even further home.
So open your mind (or plug your nose) and come along with us, down down down the glittery rabbit hole.
