HONG KONG — President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines was elected in May after pledging to kill 100,000 criminals in his first six months in office, vowing that fish in Manila, the capital, would grow fat from eating the bodies of drug dealers and other “do nothings.”
In Mr. Duterte’s first three months as president, his bloody campaign led to the killing of about 1,400 drug suspects by the police and hundreds of others by extrajudicial means, according to official estimates. He has also publicly accused thousands of government officials of being involved in the drug trade, in some cases offering no evidence.
The campaign has taken particular aim at people who use or sell shabu, a cheap form of methamphetamine that has caused grave health and social problems across the country. Mr. Duterte has likened shabu addicts to zombies and claimed — absent evidence — that many are “no longer viable for rehabilitation” because abusing the drug shrinks their brains.
What is methamphetamine?
Methamphetamine is an addictive stimulant that can be made from ephedrine and other readily available chemicals. It typically comes in either tablets, called yaba in parts of Asia, or crystalline form. The first variety is common in mainland Southeast Asia, and the second — known as shabu, ice or crystal meth, among other names — is more popular in the Philippines and many other countries. It also tends to be more potent and more deeply intertwined with international drug manufacturing and smuggling networks, according to a report by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
How does the drug affect people who use it? 
Smoking, snorting, ingesting or injecting methamphetamine can cause aggression, memory loss and a range of other health complications, including heart attack or sudden death. Links between methamphetamine abuse and crime, disease transmission and other social problems have also been documented. A study by the RAND Corporation found that the effects of methamphetamine abuse, including the burden of addiction and treatment, cost the United States $23.4 billion in 2005.
How common is methamphetamine use in the Philippines?
The United Nations reports that Southeast Asia is among the world’s largest methamphetamine markets. In the Philippines, the government’s Dangerous Drugs Board has estimated that 1.3 million of the country’s 100 million people are illegal drug users and that shabu is the most commonly used illegal substance, ahead of marijuana and inhalants. It also reports that shabu was the drug of choice for about 97 percent of the 5,402 people who were admitted last year to drug treatment facilities.
Does that explain why Mr. Duterte is so eager to fight methamphetamine?
Not entirely. Mr. Duterte said in his inauguration speech that illegal drugs, corruption and a breakdown of law and order were “mere symptoms” of a larger problem that posed an existential threat: a widespread erosion of trust in government itself. A similar philosophy informed another anti-crime campaign that he once carried out as mayor of Davao City, in the southern Philippines.
Rights groups and world leaders, including President Barack Obama, have expressed concern that Mr. Duterte’s antidrug campaign may erode the rule of law. But Ranjit S. Rye, a professor of political science at the University of the Philippines, said that while Mr. Duterte’s presidency had been unusually contentious, ordinary Filipinos are willing to overlook his “political incorrectness” because they admire his forcefulness and feel that his campaign against crime has made their communities safer.
“People see that this person means what he says and says what he means,” Professor Rye said.
Are shabu users “no longer viable for rehabilitation” because abusing the drug shrinks their brains, as Mr. Duterte claims? 
In July, Mr. Duterte said that the brains of shabu users begin to shrink after they use the drug more than a dozen times and that rehabilitation was not a viable option for shabu users on a large scale.
Robert Ali, a specialist in addiction medicine at the University of Adelaide in Australia, pushed back against the first assertion, saying in an email that methamphetamine destroys dopamine neurons but does not “shrink brains.”
Dr. Ali, who has studied methamphetamine abuse across the Asia Pacific region, added that most users only require outpatient treatment and that not all of them will benefit from residential rehabilitation. “Early intervention works but requires a sense that seeking help won’t lead to arrest and punishment,” he added.
Do most methamphetamine users in the Philippines have access to good treatment? 
No. Amid Mr. Duterte’s threats of violence, more than 720,000 professed drug users have turned themselves in to the authorities. But in a country with fewer than 50 drug rehabilitation centers and a shortage of doctors and drug counselors, the government has been woefully unprepared to meet soaring demands for treatment.
Drug policy experts say that the government’s main approach has been registering and testing professed drug users and beginning construction on more rehabilitation centers to house them. But it may take far longer to train a work force to staff the centers, and experts say the government is not following the “community based” treatment model that most international health and drug policy experts view as more effective and humane — one that integrates treatment with existing health services, emphasizes social reintegration and acknowledges that addiction relapses are common.
“Everybody’s talking about building rehab centers, but not much about developing capacity or setting standards” of community-based treatment for methamphetamine users, said Inez Feria, the director of NoBox Transitions Foundation, an advocacy group in Quezon City that focuses on drug policy in the Philippines. “There’s a lot missing in the discourse.”
How will Mr. Duterte’s anti-crime campaign end?
Mr. Duterte has backtracked on his initial pledge to eradicate crime from the Philippines in three to six months, saying that he would now need a year.
Some analysts say that the campaign is reminiscent of other so-called wars on drugs — in Thailand, the United States and elsewhere — that drug policy experts view as failures. Others predict that Mr. Duterte’s political allies and constituents may eventually tire of the daily drumbeat of violence and begin to wonder if the administration is guilty of the same corruption and vice that it rails against.
“There is a kind of permissiveness” for strongman politics in the Philippines at the moment, said John Sidel, an expert on the country’s politics at the London School of Economics. “But what is it actually going to do? It’s not going to buy him six years’ worth of approval.”
