RECENTLY, I signed up for a “virtual inbox assistant” service. I gave the assistant, Julie, access to my email and calendar over the Internet.
Here’s what Julie said on the first day of work:
“I am now at your disposal to process any calendar-related task you may delegate to me … I am thrilled we can start working together. I cannot wait to respond to your first request!”
If the words in that message sound too perky and supplicating to be believed, well, you are right. Julie isn’t a real person. Julie is an app. Not human. Software. It is artificial intelligence that a start-up has dressed up with a woman’s name and feminine pronouns.
Julie isn’t the only imaginary woman in my digital life. Driving in an unfamiliar city, I will put my iPhone in the cup holder and listen to Siri’s calm voice guiding me through new streets. If I had a Windows phone, I would get turn-by-turn directions from its Cortana app, with a voice that is similarly pleasant and feminine.
Instead of Julie, I might have tried Clara, another virtual inbox assistant. The company describes it as “highly responsive, empathetic, and learning more every day.” There’s also Amy from the start-up X.ai, who will “do all the tedious email ping pong that comes along with scheduling a meeting.” Other voice, text and inbox apps have names like Crystal, Jeannie and Cloe.
Dag Kittlaus, who helped create Siri, has said the app gets its name, in part, from a woman he knew in Norway. Cortana was named after a feminine artificial intelligence agent in the video game franchise Halo, and Microsoft even hired the same voice actress for its service. Founders of two virtual assistant apps said they were inspired by helpmates on TV: Dawn gets its name from Don Draper’s assistant on “Mad Men,” and Donna after an assistant on “The West Wing.” It seems like developers decided on Julie, Amy and Clara only because these are common women’s names. These products, representing new technological possibilities, play into old stereotypes about what gender is best suited for administrative work.
While Apple introduced a male voice option a year after Siri’s launch, I don’t know anyone who uses it. The two assistant apps with masculine pronouns I have come across, Jarvis and Jeeves, share their names with butlers in Marvel comics and P. G. Wodehouse novels. The year after Amy debuted, X.ai announced its “twin,” Andrew. Still, the masculine named option is scarcely mentioned on the company’s website.
And why does artificial intelligence need a gender at all? Why not imagine a talking cat or a wise owl as a virtual assistant? I would trust an anthropomorphized cartoon animal with my calendar. Better yet, I would love to delegate tasks to a non-binary gendered robot alien from a galaxy where setting up meetings over email is respected as a high art.
But Julie could be the name of a friend of mine. To use it at all requires an element of playacting. And if I treat it with kindness, the company is capitalizing on my very human emotions.
There appears to be just one woman among the 12 combined co-founders of Siri, Julie Desk, X.ai and Clara Labs. That’s slightly worse than the nearly 17.9 percent of venture-funded companies founded by women, according to data from last year on CrunchBase. Women may be the imagined persona or voice of a product, but rarely are they the people making executive decisions.
Technologies speak with recorded feminine voices because women “weren’t normally there to be heard,” Helen Hester, a media studies lecturer at the University of West London, told me. A woman’s voice stood out. For example, an automated recording of a woman’s voice used in cockpit navigation becomes a beacon, a voice in stark contrast with that of everyone else, when all the pilots on board are men.
Ms. Hester lives in London, where the spectral sound of robotic women is piping from nearly every corner. Enter the Underground and you hear a disembodied woman announcing “the next station is Mornington Crescent” and the train’s signature canned message, “please mind the gap between the train and the platform.”
A similar voice — emotionless, timeless, with an accent difficult to place — emits from clocks and traffic lights, and inside elevators and supermarkets. The “coldness, the forthrightness of the voice” is what Ms. Hester finds striking. What human speaks with such emotionless authority? And, as Ms. Hester points out: “It’s not real authority. There’s a maternal edge to all of it. It is personal guidance rather than definite directions.”
And, she says, these voices can even play into people’s expectations of male authority because they aren’t actual women. People hear a woman’s voice, realize it is robotic, and “imagine a male programmer” did the actual work.
No one seems to market tech products in the image of the most famous virtual assistant in film history. Hal from “2001: A Space Odyssey” was so brilliant and manly that it attempted to kill off the crew of the spacecraft it was built to manage. Instead, people build what I call “Stepford apps.” These are the Internet’s answer to those old sci-fi robots in dresses mopping floors with manufactured enthusiasm.
The Amazon Echo voice-activated home-automation system is another Stepford-style device, with a woman’s voice and name, Alexa. Of course consumer reviews on the website either praise or complain about “her” with the feminine pronoun. A friend of mine who owns the device told me, “Sometimes I wish she’d just shut up.” If my friend says “weather” in the middle of a conversation, the device might interject — “Right now in New York it is 45 degrees …” 
Alexa sounds like a nag. Now I’m using sexist language to dismiss a gadget. Imagine if the plug-in devices that made housework more efficient were, like Alexa, sold with women’s names and talked about with female pronouns. “Could you hand me the Amanda? She’s in the hall closet.” “Please clean the Sarah when you’re finished with the onions.” “The Emily is broken.” That could easily lead to characterizing an overflowing dishwasher as a “bubbly,” garrulous woman, or a microwave slowing down because of “her” age.
I used Julie only once, sending an email to a friend, copying the app email, with a time and date to meet for coffee. Julie emailed back promptly confirming the appointment, and it added the meeting to my calendar. The product is an interesting idea and easy to use, but interacting with a fake woman assistant just feels too weird. So I shut “her” off. This Stepford app, designed to make my work more efficient, only reminds me of the gendered division of labor that I’m trying to escape.
