WASHINGTON — Foreign smugglers are trying to ship advanced American technologies — which can be used for weapons and spy equipment — to China, Russia and other adversaries at rates that outpace shadowy and illegal exports during the Cold War, according to United States officials and experts.
In one recent case, a Texas businessman was paid $1.5 million to buy special radiation-resistant circuits for space programs in Russia and China. The businessman, Peter A. Zuccarelli, was working with a smuggling ring run by a Pakistani-born American citizen; court documents show Mr. Zuccarelli created fake shipping documents and mislabeled the circuits as parts for touch-screen computers. He was sentenced in January to four years in prison.
In another case, the Chinese citizen Fuyi Sun sought to buy M60 carbon fiber, which is used in military drones, from undercover federal agents at Homeland Security Investigations. Using the word “banana” as code for “carbon fiber,” Mr. Sun took steps to conceal and export $25,000 worth of the material that he bought shortly before he was arrested. He was sentenced in September to three years in prison.
“He openly claimed in an email that he was closely associated with the military,” said Pete Gizas, a special agent with Homeland Security Investigations, a branch of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
Since 2013, nearly 3,000 people have been swept up by Homeland Security Investigations alone for trying to smuggle weapons and sensitive technologies — including circuits or other products that can be used in ballistic missiles, drones or explosive devices. In that time, according to documents from the Department of Homeland Security, federal agents also seized more than 7,000 items, including microchips and jet engine parts, set to be smuggled out.
Exporting such items is tightly controlled by the American government to prevent hostile nations or terrorist organizations from turning them into weapons or devices that could harm the United States. In the past, such technology has turned up in improvised explosive devices in Iraq, Russian fighter jets and Chinese military satellites.
Russia, China, North Korea and Iran are some of the countries most active in trying to illegally acquire American military technology, officials said.
Adversaries have long deployed spies and black market dealers to obtain American technology. But the scale of current efforts is unusual — “worse than anything that occurred during the Cold War,” said Robert S. Litwak, the vice president for scholars and director of international security studies at the Wilson Center in Washington.
“During the Cold War, there was essentially one threat: the former Soviet Union,” said Mr. Litwak, who served on the National Security Council during the Clinton administration. “Now there are numerous threats.”
The rise is connected to an increase in foreign hackers who are infiltrating the American defense industry and technology companies to steal blueprints for weapons and sensitive technology.
“So they can sit in Iran or North Korea, out of reach of U.S. authorities, and just take what they need without trying to smuggle the item out of the country or getting someone to steal it,” said Patrick McElwain, who runs a special export enforcement unit at Homeland Security Investigations.
“It makes things difficult for us,” he added.
China and Russia have poured billions of dollars into research and development as they challenge the United States for global superpower status. But experts said their military and space programs remain years behind, unable to engineer advanced circuitry needed to match American satellites and weapons systems.
China recently announced its largest increase in military spending since 2015, to pay for an ambitious modernization program that would include developing stealth fighters, aircraft carriers and anti-satellite missiles.
Officials at the Chinese Defense Ministry could not be reached for comment.
The Russian Defense Ministry also declined to comment. But Ruslan N. Pukhov, director of the Center for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies, Russia’s leading think tank for the defense industry and arms trade, said claims of an increase in Russian attempts to steal American military technologies were overblown.
“It is my firm belief that such cases have not become more widespread,” Mr. Pukhov said. “The public just pays more attention to them now because of the strained relations between Russia and the United States.”
But some American experts, citing arrests and convictions of people who have been caught, said technology stolen from the United States had helped adversaries develop new weapons systems.
Officials point to the sentencing last year of Alexander Posobilov of Houston, who was part of an extensive smuggling network that provided Russia with restricted American technology.
Court records show that Mr. Posobilov and other smugglers were accused of providing at least $50 million worth of advanced microelectronics — which are frequently used in military systems for radar, surveillance and missile guidance — to Russian military and intelligence agencies over a decade.
Bruce W. Bennett, a senior military analyst at the RAND Corporation, said China in particular had a strong manufacturing base and the scientific know-how to make sophisticated weapons. But developing the new systems can take years, “so why invest the money and the time to develop it, when you can just acquire it through other means?” he said.
It is unclear how successful China, Russia, North Korea and other countries have been in acquiring American-made weaponry or technology. But officials say they believe the problem is a widespread national security concern.
Homeland Security Investigations runs the government’s efforts to control exports of sensitive technology and arms through the Export Enforcement Coordination Center.
It is led by Mr. McElwain, a special agent who works alongside investigators and analysts from the F.B.I. and the State, Commerce and Defense Departments. Intelligence agencies are also involved.
The task of separating illegal exports from legitimate shipments of weapons and technology is daunting. Some items — such as stolen microcircuits — tend to be small and can be easily hidden.
And a legally-exported technology purchase can become illegal after it leaves the United States. That happens when sensitive technology is shipped to friendly nations but then immediately and illegally sent to nations where such exports violate American laws, including China and Iran.
United States officials comb through law enforcement, intelligence and trade databases to look for suspicious packages that might contain stolen technology. They also rely on tips from companies who receive suspicious queries for items.
But the foreign smuggling rings that seek to illegally export American technology show no signs of abating.
Military contractors and technology companies have reported a tenfold increase in the number of suspicious inquiries they receive from individuals asking about weapons systems and technology, according to a person familiar with the queries who was not authorized to discuss current investigations.
Despite the dismantling of some smuggling rings, the federal authorities remain outgunned, said David Albright, the president of the Institute for Science and International Security in Washington.
“The mechanisms to defeat export controls multiply faster than the efforts to stop them,” he said.
