Bruce Mazlish, a historian of ideas who created controversy with psychoanalytic biographies of living world leaders, including one about Richard M. Nixon that assessed him as constantly seeking crises to confront as a way of handling unresolved childhood traumas, died on Sunday in Cambridge, Mass. He was 93.
His wife, Neva Goodwin, confirmed the death on Tuesday.
Professor Mazlish spent nearly his entire career at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he said his experience teaching European history to young scientists and engineers inspired a lifelong interest in understanding the divide between science and the humanities, a disconnect considered a crisis in academia during the postwar years.
To bridge that divide, Professor Mazlish wrote about the philosophical underpinnings of space exploration, the literary history of artificial intelligence and the bewilderment shared by neuroscientists and psychologists alike over the irrationality at the core of human behavior.
His first book, “The Western Intellectual Tradition: From Leonardo to Hegel,” a collaboration with the British mathematician and poet Jacob Bronowski, traced the roots of modern science and social analysis to a common lode of insights about the world that emerged during the Renaissance. It has been in print since it was first published in 1960.
Professor Mazlish was best known for putting Nixon on the couch in “In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry” (1972). The book, by his reckoning, was an attempt to fuse science, or at least psychoanalytical insight, with the study of contemporary history.
“Nixon is a man torn between his mother’s dislike of warfare and his father’s sharp competitiveness,” Professor Mazlish wrote. “He is extremely ambivalent about his aggressive impulses and tends to deal with them by projection onto others.”
He saw Nixon as being irresistibly attracted to crisis situations and concluded that this behavior was the president’s only way “to confront his death fears,” which he said had originated in the deaths of two brothers from tuberculosis when Nixon was a boy.
Published a month before the Watergate break-in, the book received much attention but mixed reviews. In The New York Times, Christopher Lehmann-Haupt pronounced Professor Mazlish’s analysis unconvincing and said his hypothesis about Nixon’s death fear was “extremely tenuous.”
Professor Mazlish published a series of similar books throughout the 1970s, profiling Henry A. Kissinger, Jimmy Carter and Mao Zedong, among others. In 1979, after New York magazine asked him to profile the leader of the Iranian revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Professor Mazlish wrote that Khomeini was filled with a “rage of monumental proportions” rooted in unresolved questions about the death of his father, possibly by murder, when Khomeini was a child.
Though not a psychologist, Professor Mazlish belonged to a group of historians and psychoanalysts who came of age between the two world wars sensing that Freudian insights might help illuminate one of history’s most impenetrable regions: the minds of world leaders, whose every decision may affect tens of millions of people.
In the mid-1960s, he was a founding member of the Wellfleet Group, an informal association of scholars, most of them from Harvard, who proposed that historians look beyond the usual fields of conflict considered the driving engines of historic events — between nation-states or between haves and have-nots — to explore the conflict between rational and irrational forces in decision makers’ minds.
The group included Robert Jay Lifton, a psychiatrist later known for his books about the psychological origins of Nazi atrocities and the emotional trauma suffered by Hiroshima victims, and Erik Erikson, the Harvard psychologist whose groundbreaking psychological profiles of Martin Luther, Hitler, Gandhi and Jesus were the psychohistorians’ chief inspiration. The group’s meetings were held at Dr. Lifton’s home in Wellfleet, Mass.
Forty years later, Professor Mazlish admitted that the promise of psychohistory had yet to be realized. There were never enough scholars attracted to such interdisciplinary work — or qualified to provide peer review of it — he said in a 2004 interview in The Bulletin of the Historical Society. As a result, he said, “you almost never achieve critical mass.”
Professor Mazlish himself shifted away from psychohistory. But he continued to probe the nexus of science and the humanities in later works, including “The Fourth Discontinuity: The Co-Evolution of Humans and Machines” (1993), a history of the troubled relations between people and their machines. The book ended with his prediction of an eventual fusion of the two into “something like a new species.”
In another book, “The Uncertain Sciences” (1998), he laid out a history of behavioral science and suggested that understanding humans might be a scientific frontier that may never be conquered.
After becoming a professor emeritus in 2003, he pursued another interdisciplinary mission: the New Global History Initiative. It was begun by historians and scientists in the early 2000s, with a goal to rethink the notion of history in an age of multiculturalism and globalization.
Bruce Mazlish was born on Sept. 15, 1923, in Brooklyn, one of three children of Louis Mazlish and the former Lena Reuben. His father started out as a driver for a laundry service and became a prosperous businessman.
Professor Mazlish graduated from Boys High School in Brooklyn and Columbia University. After serving in the Office of Strategic Services, the precursor to the C.I.A., during World War II, he received a master’s degree from Columbia and remained there to earn a Ph.D. in European history in 1955 while lecturing at various colleges. He joined the M.I.T. faculty after receiving his doctorate and became a full professor in 1960.
In addition to his wife, an economist, he is survived by four children from two previous marriages, Cordelia Savala and Peter, Anthony and Jared Mazlish; two stepchildren, David and Miranda Kaiser; six grandchildren; and a sister, Elaine Wyden. He lived in Cambridge.
Addressing the skepticism with which some of his work was received by fellow historians, Professor Mazlish said in 2004: “Historians get scared that we are doing contemporary history, but Herodotus did contemporary history. We have got to deal with the issues of enormous importance to our existence, and if they happen to involve practicing contemporary history, so be it.”
In an interview for this obituary in 2011, Professor Mazlish said negative reaction to his work had peaked with publication of the Nixon book. “I got a ton of hate mail,” he said — most of it from Nixon supporters, but some of it, in milder tones, from fellow academics.
“They accused me of being partisan,” he added. “They said my analysis lacked merit. Then came Watergate. As I remember, the hate mail stopped after that.”
