“I sat entranced by a beautiful procession of princesses, castle guards, and whimsical woodland creatures,” Colleen Hill wrote in her recently released book, “Fairy Tale Fashion.” Ms. Hill, the associate curator of accessories at the Museum at FIT, was describing her thoughts looking online at Dolce & Gabbana’s fall 2014 collection.
“Losing all objectivity as a curator, I envisioned myself in a red fur hood, or wearing one of the design duo’s flowing, chiffon gowns patterned with small golden keys,” she wrote. “It struck me that it was time to propose an exhibition about fairy tales.”
The result, also named “Fairy Tale Fashion,” is showing at the Museum at FIT through April 16. Ms. Hill, 33, is the youngest person in the museum’s history to curate a special exhibit.
Spanning the 17th to 20th centuries, from Charles Perrault’s version of “Cinderella” and Serge Diaghilev’s ballet of “The Sleeping Beauty” to Max Factor’s 1954 Riding Hood Red lipstick (it promised to “bring the wolves out”), her book is an elaborate 275-page catalog. It focuses on 13 classics, including the lesser-known “The Fairies” and “Furry Pelts.” Sure, the “The Snow Queen” is included, but so is “The Swan Maidens” and both ”Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland” and “The Wonderful Wizard of Oz” (neither typically thought of as a fairy tale).
For the exhibit, which also includes “Snow White and Rose Red” and “The Red Shoes,” Ms. Hill interpreted what the characters, from heroine to mad hatter, evil queen or sea witch, would wear. Terrible, dramatic and magical things happen in fairy tales, and everyone in them is dressed for the occasion, in everything from tatters to raiment or grotesque disguises. (Just as at fashion shows.)
The curator drew from late-19th- and early-20th-century illustrations, films and scholarly texts to create a glittering, glassy, dreamy, haunting display of 73 fashions and 13 accessories, including clear slippers by Noritaka Tatehana made from a 3-D printer, against a backdrop of looming trees. Stephen Jones, the British hat designer, created a tweed-covered wire bear head as a charming topper for a raw-edged Thom Browne suit from the fall 2014 men’s wear collection, representing the bear prince from “Rose Red and Snow White.”
Prada’s spring 2008 collection featured fairy illustrations by the artist James Jean, images that Ms. Hill said she found simultaneously beautiful and sinister. She used that season’s ensembles to illustrate “The Fairies,” by Charles Perrault. (In typical fairy behavior, an otherworldly sprite in this story disguises herself to test the character of two sisters. One is rewarded with flowers and gems spilling from her lips whenever she speaks, the other gets toads and snakes.)
Little Red Riding Hood asserts herself, perhaps most powerfully, throughout the exhibit. Along with illustrations by Walter Crane and Arthur Rackham, there are six red cloaks: the oldest, a red felted-wool number from late-18th-century England; the most extravagant, Altuzarra’s scarlet velvet hooded cape dusted with Swarovski crystals; and the most contemporary, an après-wolf creation with blood-red slashed cape and pointy quilted patent-leather hood from Rei Kawakubo’s Comme des Garçons spring 2015 collection.
“The red cloak symbolizes vanity,” Ms. Hill said as she walked through the exhibit on a recent morning, clad in a ’60s black velvet mini with bell sleeves edged in white lace.
Mermaids, whom the Victorians might call hopelessly underclothed, are also well represented and with nothing as obvious as a tail. Jean Louis Sabaji’s froth of stormy sea foam billowing about the mannequin’s feet is a standout, as is a beautifully washed-up gown by Rodarte with castoff netting dripping over floaty flotsam tulle upon which water flowers float. It lacks only an Ophelia.
The 1989 Disney film “The Little Mermaid” was Ms. Hill’s first exposure to fairy tales, and that sweetened interpretation contrasted harshly with the Hans Christian Andersen story she read at 10. But the harsher version must have made a strong impression as the fashions in the exhibit are more glamorously Grimm than Disney.
The Sea Witch from the mermaid tale is ominous and foreboding with a dangerous-crustacean silhouette by Hideki Seo, who also designed the Queen of Hearts. Tom Ford’s fragmented mirrors dress represents “The Snow Queen,” the story that begins with a wicked demon’s mirror shattering into billions of bits, some of which lodge in a little boy’s eye and heart. And “Sleeping Beauty” is imagined in a Marchesa moonbeam-colored evening gown that looks as if it’s disappearing into mist.
The museum’s Wicked Witch of the West, meanwhile, wears Thierry Mugler.
“Often ugliness is linked to evil in fairy tales and goodness to beauty,” Ms. Hill said, but “I think particularly now with contemporary fairy-tale films with Maleficent wearing these gorgeous gowns, there’s a shift toward fashionable wicked women.” She added, “The stories wouldn’t be fascinating without them.”
Citing Kenneth Branagh’s “Cinderella,” Ms. Hill emphasized that the fragile femininity of fairy-tale fashion doesn’t spell victim. “I’d never want to be flippant about femininity and fairy tales,” she said. “If you look at the tale ‘Furry Pelts,’ the resourceful heroine is strong enough to flee her destiny.”
Certainly, there is nothing hobbling about recent designer interpretations of the fairy, which may include the ethereal, petal-dusted aquamarine Armani Privé dress Cate Blanchett wore to the Oscars, and Sarah Burton’s otherworldly, diaphanous creations for Alexander McQueen, inspired by the 17th-century weavers who spun French flowers into the patterns on their silks.
Exhibit subjects are often barefoot, without handbags to weigh them down. More curious is another missing accessory: wings. Unless you count the winged fairies on Alexander McQueen’s sinister fairies evening gown, which is black and sprinkled with skeletal pale-winged creatures, not the kind you’d envision keeping Tinker Bell company.
But maybe it’s time to check your preconception about what exactly constitutes a fairy at the door.
“I found the fairy aspect of this,” Ms. Hill said, “the fairies themselves to be the most fascinating, when described in the texts on mythological beings, in that there’s no one way to be a fairy.”
