Sometimes fashion is art, sometimes it is just stuff to wear. Other times it is mind-boggling craft and exquisite technique whose aesthetic strangeness can render the art question moot.
That’s the effect of “Manus x Machina: Fashion in an Age of Technology,” the latest of the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s annual fashion extravaganzas from its Costume Institute, and one distinguished by a lack of Met Gala-style hoopla. It celebrates the luxury wares of mostly French fashion houses, but brings fresh focus to the convergence of traditional haute couture and high-end ready-to-wear. A new closeness has emerged, partly through a shared reliance on intricate tech-savvy processes. The exhibition is sponsored by Apple — perhaps an improvement over the often-too-cozy patronage of fashion houses — and comes at a time when a few tech companies are edging into fashion with their own athleisure lines.
The show is unusually thoughtful — a stately, gorgeous tutorial. Encompassing 170 ensembles and dresses, it examines how haute couture, long associated with impeccably handmade garments tailored to individual clients, is increasingly integrating breakthroughs in technologies and materials. Technology (machina) is not replacing the hand (manus); rather, the two are collaborating as never before, stimulating innovation and expression.
This is evidenced by an assortment of dresses, several of them by the imaginative Dutch designer Iris van Herpen, that border on sculpture in their form and lack of function. The often complex joinings of forces are spelled out in labels where various kinds of handwork mingle with references to 3-D printing, laser this and laser that, ultrasonic welding and custom software-rendered patterns.
As these extravaganzas go, “Manus x Machina” is exceptional, its clarity and serenity distinguishing it from quite a few of its predecessors at the Costume Institute. It was organized by Andrew Bolton, who became its head curator in January, with the retirement of the widely respected Harold Koda.
Mr. Bolton has always aimed high, often guided by a flair for showmanship. He has risked failure and, at times, been its victim. He was responsible for the finely honed spectacle of the Alexander McQueen retrospective in 2011 and the ambitious but flawed “China: Through the Looking Glass” last year. But he has also organized exercises in frenetic vacuity like “AngloMania,” “Superheroes: Fashion and Fantasy” and the overreaching “Punk: Chaos to Couture.”
With “Manus x Machina,” Mr. Bolton is in fine form: over the top, but with a dignity and restraint more typical of his predecessor, especially in Mr. Koda’s last major exhibition, an examination of Charles James’s wonderfully architectural garments.
Mr. Bolton’s show is structured according to six of the métiers — or trades — of dressmaking that are as essential to couture today as they were in the mid-18th-century, when Diderot’s encyclopedia formalized their tools and processes. (The pertinent volumes are on view.)
The métiers here progress from embroidery and featherwork, through artificial flowers, pleating, lace and leatherwork. Métiers have usually been handled by outside specialists famous in their own right, among them Maison Lesage (embroidery), Maison Sophie Hallette (lace) and Maison Lemarié (feather and leatherwork).
The show also includes a section titled “Tailleur & Flou,” or tailoring and dressmaking, the traditional divisions within a couture house. Here you’ll also find toiles, or muslins — prototypes used in early stages of the design process. Included are both actual muslins and irreverent contemporary garments inspired by them, from designers like Martin Margiela, John Galliano for Dior and Alber Elbaz for Lanvin.
“Manus x Machina” occupies the two-story Robert Lehman Wing — a new location in the Met for Costume Institute shows. It is blissfully low-tech. A few short videos on tiny screens allow glimpses at the designers or artisans at work. The show’s only soundtrack is Brian Eno’s soothing, slightly ecclesiastical “An Ending (Ascent),” which is almost certain to enhance concentration.
So will the exhibition’s wonderfully understated gallery treatments conceived by Shohei Shigematsu, who leads the New York office of Rem Koolhaas’s Office for Metropolitan Architecture, in collaboration with the Met’s design department.
The clothes are set against white cotton backdrops that sharpen their colors. In addition to lining the walls, this muslinlike fabric is used for scrims that form arched niches and domes, transforming the space into a glowing, abstract cathedral.
A false floor has also been built across the Lehman’s atrium, creating a central gallery, an interesting precedent that other museums saddled with uninspiring spaces might study.
The show opens in this center gallery with the first of several case studies, the term used here for a featured garment whose making is detailed in an extended wall label. This one is a Renaissance-style wedding dress designed in 2014-15 by Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel. Made from creamy synthetic scuba knit — which holds shape very well — it has a 20-foot train painted and printed with slightly pixelated gold foliate pattern based on a sketch by Mr. Lagerfeld. This pattern is also projected, greatly magnified, on the dome high overhead — a beautiful effect that recurs more modestly with the other case studies.
The clothes here aren’t always the latest thing. They reach back over 100 years, indicating that couture has always kept up with innovations, among them the sewing machine (used to make a Paul Poiret coat in 1919) and machine-made lace (Coco Chanel, in the late ’30s).
The difference between handmade and machine-made is sometimes hard to discern, sometimes blatant, as in the show’s dynamic lace section. Plastic is usually a sign of machine intervention, but even the thatches of common plastic straws — clear and black — in two recent dresses by Gareth Pugh are hand-cut and attached individually. Mr. Pugh’s garments introduce the featherwork section, where the shocker is a dress by Ms. van Herpen that includes laser-cut silicone feathers and three silicone-dipped gull skulls, while the stunner is a long princess-line evening dress by Raf Simons for Dior that is covered with small (hand-glued) rooster feathers in a rainbow of subtle colors.
Different sections unfold like small shows unto themselves, loosely thematic and color-coordinated, full of interesting cross-references. The embroidery section has an aquatic tone; scales are a frequent motif and sequins a recurring material, as signaled by Yves Saint Laurent’s astounding “sardine” dress of 1983 (a case study). Blues, greens and silvers dominate this section, and even exceptions are oceanic: a coral-colored gown dotted with coral beads by Givenchy and a tour de force from the Alexander McQueen designer Sarah Burton (2012, ready-to-wear) that looks like solid coral, including numerous branches, but is often pink-dyed shells.
Each section also encompasses widely divergent sensibilities. The artificial flowers portion includes Hussein Chalayan’s metallic gold cast-fiberglass “Kaikoku” floating dress of 2011-12, a motorized cone on wheels decorated with dozens of little crystals on wings that, prompted by remote control, fly into the air — like pollen, the label says. Across from this cousin of R2-D2 stands another Chanel wedding ensemble case study, this one from 2005-06 and made completely by hand.
The garment is a full-length array of silk camellias ranging from buds to large blossoms, trimmed at the neck and wrists in ostrich feathers. Near the sublime lurks the ridiculous: a 1999 wedding ensemble by Saint Laurent that is basically a bikini of artificial roses, and two short dresses from 2009 by McQueen made of painted-metal flower petals that look like crushed bottle caps.
The first part of the pleating section is a feast of color that traces the inventive pleats of Mariano Fortuny, Mary McFadden (who figured out how to make Fortuny’s pleats mechanically) and Issey Miyake. Mr. Miyake is represented by three dresses in bright polyester on mannequins, opposite the same garments laid out flat like shaped paintings, and also by his accordionlike “flying saucer” dress displayed in three states, flat to fully extended.
The extremes of the lively lace section start with an 1870 Irish wedding dress hand-crocheted in cream-color cotton that is abloom with rather legible flowers. At the other end of the spectrum are extraordinary recent excursions into 3-D printing with synthetic polymers by Ms. van Herpen, threeASFOUR and Noa Raviv, whose dresses feature bulky, corsagelike curving forms reminiscent of Frank Gehry’s computer-aided designs.
Sometimes it’s more inspiring to see technology used in ways that seem to promise wider use, which Mr. Lagerfeld does in the tailoring section. Next to one of Coco Chanel’s classic bouclé tweed suits from the mid-1960s, Mr. Bolton has installed three new versions by Mr. Lagerfeld. At first you may notice that the fabric is quilted, slyly evoking Chanel’s little quilted purses with the gold chains, then, that it’s perforated.
This material is actually a finely gridded facsimile of weaving that was designed by Mr. Lagerfeld and 3-D-printed in a polyamide developed by Materialise. A video of models wearing the suits suggests that flexibility is still an issue, and probably expense is too. Still, it’s not hard to imagine this material as part of everyday life a few years down the road, especially without the gold, Lesage-embroidered sequins visible behind it.
Saint Laurent is known to have said: “Art is a very big word for couture. It’s a métier like any other, but a poetic métier.” Mr. Bolton quotes these words in his ravishing exhibition, which makes fashion feel bigger without fussing over its artistic status.
