SAN DIEGO — At lunchtime on a Thursday, people seated at picnic tables dotting the Quartyard sip coffee from Meshuggah Shack. Music wafts from speakers, and the scent of sausages from S&M Sausage and Meat fills the air.
As the day wears on, the scene will fill out, and coffee will give way to craft beer served from a bar fashioned out of a shipping container.
For now, the Quartyard — conceived of and built by a Rad Lab, a student-led organization, and the community — is a beer garden, event space and dog park in the downtown East Village neighborhood of this city. Its projected transition from 25,000-square-foot vacant lot to urban park to housing is part of a larger plan to create an employment hub in the neighborhood’s tech corridor.
That project, known as Makers Quarter, aims to turn six blocks of mixed-use development into one million square feet of office space, 145,000 square feet of street-level retail space, 800 residential units and 72,000 square feet of public open space over the next seven to 10 years.
Planners want to expand on the existing identity of the neighborhood, defined by artists and artisans, and attract and retain a robust talent pool for the local innovation economy.
Stacey Pennington, the master planner on the Makers Quarter project, described the vision for the neighborhood from a picnic table at Silo, an auto repair lot that has been turned into a community venue. It is currently a vacant lot that can be rented out for events, with 24 original murals by local artists.
“We were not just going to jump into building buildings right away and just expect people to come and things magically come together,” said Ms. Pennington, who founded the urban planning and design firm SLP Urban Planning. “We had this ongoing vision for how the neighborhood would develop and transform.”
In their planning, Ms. Pennington and her team — including a local artist, Christopher Konecki; Matt Carlson from the real estate firm CBRE; and Ron Troyano, event manager for Silo — used ideas from tactical urbanism, a movement in which residents and communities try out temporary projects. Their goal is to see how the projects might work out long term to build an identity for Makers Quarter.
“For several years we test ideas,” Ms. Pennington said. “The ones that work shape the future. The ones that don’t, we learn from.”
Mike Lydon, a New York-based planner, helped articulate the movement in a 2011 book, “Tactical Urbanism: Short-Term Action for Long-Term Change.” Among its best-known manifestations are the pedestrian plazas in Times Square. A pilot program to reduce vehicular traffic in that part of Manhattan was such a hit that the plazas became permanent.
A signature event of the movement is “Park(ing) Day,” in which public parking spaces are turned into pop-up parks once a year; over 140 cities worldwide take part.
The Makers Quarter plan is inspired by the neighborhood’s legacy: It has a history of furniture building, auto dealerships and repair shops, and produce packaging and shipping. Today it is home to two incubators. One, the Moniker Group, provides co-working space in a rehabilitated warehouse to emerging artists. And Fab Lab is a digital fabrication laboratory equipped with 3-D printers and other tools for experimentation and creation of prototypes.
The city government embraced the dynamic approach to planning. Todd Gloria, a member of City Council, joked, “There isn’t a ‘shipping container’ portion of our development code” to cover the repurposed containers that serve as seating for the beer garden at the Quartyard, designed by students at the nearby NewSchool of Architecture and Design.
“But,” he added, “there’s grass-roots pressure saying, ‘We don’t want an empty lot,’ combined with a business community concern to attract and retain high-quality employers. That says to City Hall: Get it done.”
In the early stages, the team reached out to the community and planned public events in neighborhood spaces like Silo, the Quartyard, a community garden and a site at 1425 E Street, all of which have been or will be transformed and incorporated into the future Makers Quarter plan.
“We clearly saw that there is an unmet demand for genuine connection in this urban neighborhood that we should embrace and promote,” said Mr. Carlson, a senior vice president at CBRE.
The site on E Street, called the Warehouse, now houses Fuse Integration, a research and development firm specializing in software and technology with a large number of government and military clients.
“It is a total shift from what is expected in my primary market space,” said Sumner Lee, president of Fuse Integration. “As the colonels and captains come to my office, they say this place looks different.”
The warehouse space has been built out but retains a raw quality, as well as most of the original murals commissioned for the Makers Quarter opening in 2013.
“When I bring people here, I get to tell the story of how design and creativity can have a positive impact,” Mr. Lee said.
Makers Quarter’s location in the tech corridor of the East Village means it is ripe for employer-driven development. The East Village is east of the Gaslamp Quarter, a trendy entertainment district full of popular restaurants and boutique shopping, and south of Balboa Park, home to museums, theaters, the San Diego Zoo and hundreds of acres of open space.
The East Village is downtown’s largest neighborhood, with about 1.2 million square feet of office space, according to CBRE San Diego. Vacancy rates hover at about 4 percent, compared with about 15 percent for the rest of downtown.
In the next phase of Makers Quarter’s development, ground was broken in April for Broadstone Makers Quarter, a 265-unit mixed-use residential project on the former site of a Goodwill store. The community garden, in a lot around the corner from Moniker, has secured a new space in Makers Quarter to make way for 50,000 square feet of creative office space, which is scheduled to break ground this summer.
And Quartyard’s days are numbered. The Holland Partner Group, based in Vancouver, Wash., has submitted a design review for a 34-story, 427-unit residential tower on the city-owned parcel. Though the beer garden was always intended to be temporary, more than 2,800 have signed a petition to save or relocate it.
Commercial tenants in the East Village cite the advantages of a changing neighborhood dotted with bars, restaurants and retail space, anchored by Petco Park, home of the Padres. The ballpark, about a mile from Makers Quarter, opened in 2004 and was part of a redevelopment plan for downtown.
Underground Elephant, a technology company specializing in online customer service platforms, moved into an 83-year-old warehouse just blocks from the Quartyard three months ago that passers-by regularly mistake for a new restaurant.
Jason Kulpa, the company’s chief executive, said he had considered moving his 100-person operation to Brooklyn or San Francisco, but decided to remain in the area because of its quality of life and lower costs. The city’s weather, easy beach access, public parks and dozens of craft breweries are also selling points to the millennial talent pool from which tech companies draw, he said.
“This will be a tech center: Silicon Valley South,” he said.
Red Door Interactive, a marketing and advertising agency, has been in the East Village for 14 years and moved from an 11th-floor space to ground-floor Class A office space adjacent to Petco Park in 2013.
“I want our people to be inspired,” said Red Door’s chief executive, Reid Carr. “Who knows who you’re going to run into, what you’re going to see, what new concept will inspire a new way of thinking. It’s why we’re down here and not up there anymore. It’s amazing what a barrier an elevator is.”
