This weekend, the Panorama festival will make its debut on Randalls Island with LCD Soundsystem, Kendrick Lamar, Arcade Fire, Alabama Shakes and a few dozen other acts, as well as a high-tech exhibition space designed for visual dazzle.
The event, which has a capacity of about 40,000 for each of its three days, is not expected to sell out. But Paul Tollett, the promoter of Panorama — and a star in the clubby concert world as the mastermind behind Coachella — is not worried.
“We’re not going to get there,” he said. “That’s totally fine.”
Mr. Tollett declined to specify how many tickets Panorama has sold so far, but its performance will be closely watched as a bellwether for what has quickly become a hypercompetitive festival market in New York. Governors Ball, which began five years ago as a modest one-day event put on by three 20-somethings, has become a nationally known festival luring stars like Kanye West and the Strokes to Randalls Island, and this year it was acquired by Live Nation Entertainment, the global concert giant.
Panorama is part of the portfolio of AEG Live, the corporate rival of Live Nation, and the competition between the two mega-promoters is in some ways a symbolic showdown for the concert business, which is now dominated by big festivals across the country. One sign of the stakes? Panorama’s arrival led to a lobbying war over the last year that resulted in the festival’s being blocked from its intended home at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens.
In an interview, Mr. Tollett discussed Panorama’s plans, including its embrace of technology through the Lab, an interactive exhibition space at the center of the festival that is being presented with HP and The Verge, the technology news website. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.
Why does New York need another music festival?
It’s a big city. In the Los Angeles area, you probably have 250,000 or 300,000 people going to music festivals, between Coachella, FYF and others. I’m talking about the nonelectronic ones. In Chicago, you’ve got 100,000. You get to New York, there are maybe 40,000. That’s the biggest city in America.
Some people might think that New York doesn’t need festivals. But London is just as cool as New York, and probably a million people go to festivals there, if you count Glastonbury, Reading, Wireless, Hyde Park. It’s big numbers.
If someone is going to go to one music festival this summer, how do you convince him or her to go to Panorama?
This year? That hasn’t really been the focus. We haven’t really been out there begging in the marketing. We’re just throwing it out there and letting people experience it, and hopefully it will build over the years.
That sounds like a very Californian attitude toward marketing a festival.
What I mean is that people need to experience the show. We have some things that we’re bringing in that are really going to turn heads, like the technology.
We have this thing called the Lab. It’s a very large dome inside where technology exhibits are going to be. There’s a lady named Emilie Baltz who has the Cotton Candy Theremin. It projects onto the dome, and it’s interacting with sound and visuals. People are going to see that and think, “I want to see that each year.”
You had originally planned for Panorama to be held at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park this year, but that was blocked after a lot of behind-the-scenes lobbying by your competitors.
We were going to be at the World’s Fair site, and that was the theme, with tech unveilings and things of that nature. We moved over to Randalls, but we still have that, scaled back, of course.
I think it’s going to be different from any festival around the country. New York in general is just higher-end — you’ve got to wow the people of New York.
Do you have to dramatically change what you do for an urban setting?
The crowd is not going to be there for three days, sleeping over. The majority of people have bought single-day tickets. So we’ve got to make sure that if you go for one day, you get the whole feeling.
Your other new event, Desert Trip, has the Rolling Stones, Paul McCartney, Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Roger Waters and the Who. Is that what you have to do to make a music festival stand out in 2016?
No. That is a unique, one-off thing. It’s not really a festival — it’s a concert, two bands a day. I just thought those six bands should play together. It’s never been done. It turned out to be the highest-grossing show by far. It beat No. 2, which is Coachella, by far. The gross is approximately $160 million for the two weekends.
Will it be profitable, given the talent and the production costs?
We’ll find out in October. But that was the intent, yes.
You sound as if you have the luxury of being patient with these festivals.
I read these press releases from all festivals, “This is going to refine, this is going to be the best,” blah blah blah. They all sound so cocky. I understand you’re trying to sell, but it just sounds like everyone is bragging.
Instead of all of us bragging, we should probably just do our shows and let people see if they have a good time. In my opinion, if you go to Panorama, you’re going to have a good time, and you’re going to want to come back.
That doesn’t take away from any other festival in New York, because they’re fun, too. I just think hundreds of thousands of people should be going to festivals in New York.
