In the moments immediately after Philando Castile was shot several times by a police officer during a traffic stop in Minnesota, his girlfriend, Diamond Reynolds, began streaming the scene on Facebook Live. The recording of Castile’s death — like that of Alton Sterling’s in Louisiana the day before — was disseminated widely on Facebook and Twitter, giving the rest of the world a visceral encounter with the stark and violent reality of racist policing. Soon after, Mark Zuckerberg penned a mildly self-congratulatory note about his company in a post on his personal Facebook page. “It reminds us why coming together to build a more open and connected world is so important,” he wrote, “and how far we still have to go.”
The technology world prides itself on being a catalyst for this kind of social movement: Iran’s Green Movement, the Arab Spring and the Maidan protests in Ukraine all, to varying degrees, coalesced with help from American-made social-media platforms. People in tech love to see their work as embodying the “hacker ethos”: a desire to break systems down in order to change them. But this pride can often be conveyed rather clumsily.
For example, Marc Benioff, the chairman of Salesforce, posted a photo of the activist DeRay Mckesson being arrested in Baton Rouge while wearing a Twitter-branded T-shirt (“#StayWoke”), alongside the triumphant caption “Amazing to see tech as vehicle for social change. Respect.” (He later deleted the tweet and apologized.) Twitter put out a call for an artist to paint a “#StayWoke” mural at its New York offices and offered a stipend of just $2,000. Even Uber temporarily changed some of the black-car icons in its app to tiny peace signs, and showed the message “one minute to reflect on gun violence” to users who were waiting for a ride. Many of these companies voicing support for Black Lives Matter employ vanishingly small numbers of black people. Their reflexive back-patting felt mostly like P.R. — efforts to claim the mantle of disruptive change without actual disruption.
Amid all of this, one conversation in particular stood out. It was a dialogue between Shervin Pishevar, a well-known Silicon Valley investor, and a handful of his peers on Twitter. Pishevar, a founder of Hyperloop One — a company trying to develop Elon Musk’s futuristic mass-transit concept — brainstormed an idea for an application to curtail the number of police shootings during traffic stops.
It was one of the few direct acknowledgments from the valley that police brutality is a problem worth trying to hack or disrupt. In a phone interview a few days after his tweets, Pishevar said of his valley colleagues, “It’s just not their reality.” Truth be told, it’s not Pishevar’s either: He has raked in millions from early strategic investments in Uber, Airbnb and Postmates, among others. But as an Iranian-American youth in Maryland, where he grew up, Pishevar knew intimately how unnerving it could be to interact with the police. According to Pishevar, on a Fourth of July many years ago, he and his friends set off some fireworks after a game of tennis. Later, as he was putting his racket in the trunk, he heard a voice behind him: “Don’t move.” It was a cop, and he was aiming a gun at him. Pishevar was terrified. The officer questioned him and then eventually let him go.
He had largely buried his memory of the incident, until he watched chaos erupt around the country after another pair of killings at the hands of police officers. “Like everyone else, I was moved,” he said. “I was just trying to find new ideas out of desperation. We need a new process.” He also has two nephews who are part African-American. He worries most about the older one. “He’s 16 and just learning to drive. It could have been him.”
Pishevar has been working with a handful of designers and activists to develop his concept: an app that combines file sharing (for license and registration information) and video chat, so both cop and citizen can communicate with each other during a traffic stop. No face-to-face contact would be necessary unless there was cause for an arrest. Pishevar’s thinking is that such an app would vastly reduce the number of times a jumpy police officer ends up standing at a window with a gun pointed at the driver’s face. It’s still in development, and the prototypes are charmingly rough: The demo images look like a particularly warped Lego universe, all blocky cars and dotted lines to indicate interactions happening from a safe distance.
Pishevar’s heart may be in the right place, but his success is contingent on factors beyond his grasp. For his app to catch on, it would require the wholesale buy-in of both police forces and civilians. Similar efforts have failed in the past. Over the past few years, the American Civil Liberties Union built an app that would allow people to report police misconduct directly to the organization. Like so many mobile apps, it never took off. Technology can be part of a solution, but it takes far more than software to usher in reform.
Even with evidence as stunning as the recordings of Sterling and Castile, accountability is hardly a given. And it may even become more difficult to secure. Against the backdrop of mourning and protest, Gov. Pat McCrory of North Carolina signed a bill to block the release of footage captured on police dash and body cameras in future shootings.
Many critics of Silicon Valley question whether the industry is really doing all it can to influence policy on this issue. “We know what it looks like when tech cares, and it doesn’t look like peace signs in the Uber app,” said Anil Dash, a tech entrepreneur and activist. Dash cited the example of FWD.us, the initiative for immigration reform led by tech executives like Zuckerberg. He also cited a colossal joint effort among websites like Tumblr and YouTube to stop two anti­piracy bills in 2011. The latter effort was able to persuade 10 million people to ask their representatives to protest the bills, which were ultimately killed. The tech industry knows how to lobby Washington on issues that affect its bottom line, but it limits its engagement with other issues to grandstanding. Or as Dash puts it, more bluntly: “Tech only cares about black people as consumers.”
Ultimately, what the tech industry really cares about is ushering in the future, but it conflates technological progress with societal progress. And perhaps all of us have come to rely too deeply on machinery and software to be our allies without wondering about the cost, the way technology doesn’t fix problems without creating new ones.
In a way, this confusion reminds me of an Isaac Asimov short story — a popular one in the valley — called “The Last Question.” In it, there exists a powerful computer that evolves until it is so omnipotent, and so invisible, that “the question of its size and Nature no longer had meaning to any terms that Man could comprehend.” Initially, it feels utopian: The computer figures out energy efficiency and deep-space travel. It even conquers death. But laced within the story’s humor is the hint of something lost: Humans became so dependent on technology that they forfeited all agency to its whims.
