LONDON — Smiling energetically, a video projection of a woman appears to be welcoming visitors to the Whitechapel Gallery here. But on approaching the work, “Homo Sacer,” by the British artist and writer James Bridle, she instead issues bureaucratic sound bites. They include text from the letter that stripped the terror suspect Mohamed Sakr of his British citizenship, two years before he was killed by a United States drone strike in Somalia in 2012.
“I was fascinated that someone born in the United Kingdom could have their citizenship removed,” Mr. Bridle said. “This work is essentially a step-by-step guide on how you can go from being a British subject to being placed in the legal position of being able to be killed.”
“Homo Sacer,” both technologically advanced and politically subversive, is typical of “Electronic Superhighway: 2016-1966,” a significant historical survey of digital art at the Whitechapel that runs until May 15. More than 130 exhibits explore how computers and the Internet have influenced artists since the mid-1960s.
Digital art seems to be enjoying a moment of acceptance at major institutions in Britain, nearly three decades after the English computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web. Somerset House’s “Big Bang Data” explores the issues surrounding data production in the digital age, and runs through March 20. Across the city, the Serpentine Gallery and the Serpentine Sackler Gallery are hosting solo outings by the painter Michael Craig-Martin and the installation artist Simon Denny, both involving marriages between art and technology, until Sunday.
“Increasingly everyone will be doing more and more of these shows,” said Omar Kholeif, the curator of “Electronic Superhighway.”
“It may be that there are not shows that have titles like this; it may be shows that just have this work implicitly in it.”
The Whitechapel exhibition is divided into three sections, broadly arranged in reverse chronological order: work from the past 16 years, art that is connected to the web via Internet browsers and pieces made before the turn of the 21st century.
“I didn’t want to shove the contemporary work at the end, as traditionally you would do in an art historical show,” Mr. Kholeif said. “I wanted that noisiness that pervades this multiple device condition that we live in to be the first thing that assaulted you.”
Not far from “Homo Sacer” is the writer Douglas Coupland’s 2015 series “Deep Face,” consisting of photographic portraits with faces obscured by colorful geometric shapes, created as a critique of the use of facial recognition technology, for which companies like Facebook have drawn criticism from privacy campaigners.
Many of the works play with interactivity. “Autonomy Cube,” a 2014 collaboration between by two Americans, the artist Trevor Paglen and the journalist and hacker Jacob Appelbaum, is on the face of it a minimalist sculpture of motherboards trapped in a transparent glass cube. But the piece is also a Wi-Fi hotspot that allows viewers to connect to the Internet via Tor, the anonymous global network.
“He’s thinking that when we enter civic institutions we expect them to have Wi-Fi,” Mr. Kholeif said. “We just hand over our data.”
“He’s trying to make that relationship very explicit, and to ask us how we engage with it,” he added.
Online identity is another theme of the exhibition. The Argentine artist Amalia Ulman’s “Excellences and Perfections” series, completed in 2014 and 2015, was originally a sequence of updates on Instagram, and is presented here as mounted prints.
Ms. Ulman photographed herself in assumed roles — exposing her midriff, or in a bathroom ready for an evening out — as a commentary on how women construct their identities on social networks.
“It was an illustration on how femininity can be something fabricated and not biological,” Ms. Ulman said in a telephone interview. “It was my first attempt to work with fiction using social media, to also demonstrate that there is no authenticity online.”
The displays of works that exist — and are accessible — online raise questions about the need for a gallery at all. In one such work, “GeoGoo,” a 2008 hack of Google platforms including Maps by the artistic duo JODI, symbols swirl in geometric patterns across digital landscapes.
“A lot of these digital pieces continue to evolve after the exhibition finishes,” said Hans-Ulrich Obrist, a co-director of the Serpentine Gallery and an advocate for pioneering digital art projects. To do so, he said, they might require the involvement of programmers as well as a “sustained infrastructure” that would allow modifications.
“Electronic Superhighway” concludes with historic pieces, including some that use now-obsolete technologies like VHS and vinyl records alongside the likes of screen-printing and 16 millimeter film depicting computer-influenced forms like grids and circuitry.
Among the standout works are two pieces by the influential video artist Nam June Paik. The towering “Internet Dream,” from 1994, a stack of 52 monitors displaying jarring abstract images, heralds the current age of digital information saturation. The 1984 video work “Good Morning, Mr. Orwell,” originally a multinational broadcast, features cameos by celebrities like Laurie Anderson and George Plimpton set to music by Peter Gabriel, Philip Glass and John Cage.
So why has it taken so long for such a broad survey? Mr. Kholeif said that presenting a critical mass of digital works was costly, time-consuming and had often been relegated to specialist galleries. “Museums haven’t tended to do it,” he said.
Mr. Coupland said that many mainstream institutions tended to play down the importance of art influenced by the Internet. “Many people, mostly older, don’t get it and are alienated by it,” he added. “There’s a divide out there.”
Mr. Obrist pointed to Mr. Paik’s career as a model for younger artists working in digital media. The Korean-American’s first solo exhibition in 1963, in which he presented his signature modified television sets, came many years after the invention of the technology that made it possible, and his works found acceptance only slowly.
“Moving image was always relegated to the cinema,” Mr. Obrist said, and as an art form was seen as subordinate to painting and sculpture. But, he said, curators have successfully challenged that assumption.
“What’s interesting,” he added, “is that it always takes time.”
