Two years had passed since Alana Nichols broke her back in a snowboarding accident, leaving her paralyzed and wheelchair-bound, when one day she took a shortcut through a gym at the University of New Mexico, where she was a student.
“I was blown away,” she said about discovering a wheelchair basketball game. “I had heard about adaptive sports. I was totally closed-minded toward them because I was such a prideful softball player. It would never compare.”
What she witnessed — coordinated athletes violently crashing into one another, working up a sweat — changed her mind.
“These people with disabilities, some even more severe than mine, were doing it,” she said. “They weren’t sulking in their sorrows and missing their legs. They were trying to be the best athletes they could. I needed to figure this out.”
More than a dozen years later, Nichols, 33, continues to figure out new sports. The first American woman to win gold at the summer and winter Paralympic Games, she will try to add another medal — in another sport — starting Wednesday, when she will join nine other women in the debut of sprint kayak at the Paralympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.
Nichols has previously won gold medals in wheelchair basketball (2008) and Alpine skiing (2010).
Although Nichols did not begin training as a kayaker until two years ago, she finished eighth at the paracanoe world championships in Duisburg, Germany, in May, while competing in the KL2 class, for athletes with good arm strength but partial leg and trunk function.
“Alana has that nonphysical part that makes her want to excel, that goes to the pain and pushes the limits,” said Deborah Page, the team leader and a coach of the United States paracanoe team, “because you don’t paddle 200 meters as hard as you can without it hurting.”
For Nichols, suffering has tended to produce her best performances.
Born in New Mexico, she was 9 months old when her father was killed by a drunken driver. Struggling to raise four children, her mother sent Nichols and her older sister, Jovan, to be raised by grandparents in Farmington, N.M., where she grew up playing softball, basketball and volleyball.
“She just wanted to be great at sports,” said Crystal Stallings, a childhood friend who recalled Nichols as an impulsive daredevil with a competitive streak. “It was her dream to do collegiate sports, and beyond.”
But in 2000, when she was a high school senior mulling options for collegiate softball, Nichols attempted a back flip on a backcountry snowboard trip in Colorado. She landed on her back, breaking it and leaving her paralyzed from the waist.
“Every part of my identity was wrapped up in being an athlete and using my body,” she said. “I was just lost. I went back to high school and cried every day in private, trying to keep it together and get through it.”
Nine months after her injury, Nichols joined Jovan at the University of New Mexico. “The two years post-injury were the darkest times,” Alana Nichols said. “Getting up out of bed some days was really hard.”
Discovering wheelchair basketball helped Nichols recapture her identity. She transferred to the University of Arizona, which offers a training center and six sports for athletes with disabilities: men’s basketball, women’s basketball, track and road racing, tennis, rugby and handcycling.
In 2004, she earned a spot on the United States women’s wheelchair basketball team, and she remained a member of the team through 2012.
After completing work on a bachelor’s degree in special education rehab and school psychology from Arizona in 2006, and a master’s in kinesiology from the University of Alabama in 2008, Nichols returned to the mountains, and to adaptive skiing.
“Part of me just wanted to get back on the horse that knocked me off,” she said.
Training at the National Sports Center for the Disabled, in Winter Park, Colo., she reconnected with her older brother, D. J., who was living in Denver. “He was my No. 1 fan. He came up to Winter Park a bunch to support me.”
In June 2009, D. J. Nichols was shot to death and his body dumped in the mountains near Vail. In 2010, a man pleaded guilty to his murder. “That was one of those moments like breaking your back,” Alana Nichols said. “I’ll never be the same. It was like part of my heart got paralyzed.”
A grieving Nichols made the United States Alpine team for the 2010 Vancouver Games, and dedicated her Paralympic performance to her brother’s memory.
She won gold in the giant slalom and in the downhill, plus a silver and a bronze, to become the most decorated athlete of those Games. Four years later, in Sochi, Russia, Nichols added a silver medal in the downhill. But she had broken her shoulder in a collision with a boulder six months earlier, and injuries from Alpine skiing were taking a toll.
“I really couldn’t do anything independently,” she said about life with a broken shoulder. “That really made me think about how I want the rest of my life to go.”
While on a trip to Hawaii in 2014, Nichols discovered adaptive surfing — sitting on top of the board and using a paddle to propel into the waves — and fell in love with the sport.
Through AccesSurf, a nonprofit that makes surfing accessible to people with disabilities, Nichols met Spike Kane, a surfer who was paralyzed 11 years ago in Seattle when a car ran him over while he was riding his motorcycle.
Kane had coached sprint kayaking before his injury, and Nichols asked for his help as she committed to competing at her fifth Paralympics, in Rio. She moved to San Diego, using surfing with a kayak paddle as cross-training. Kane helped create a kayak setup for Nichols and served as a consultant.
Nichols said her past achievements conferred no advantages in her new sport.
“I’m an adrenaline junkie,” she said. “I like that immediate gratification of getting a basket or winning a ski race within a minute. For me, it’s been a huge challenge mentally of hours and hours of the same motion. It’s one of the hardest things I’ve ever done.”
Two months before the start of the Rio Games, Nichols wavered, and considered pulling out of the competition.
Nerve pain from a bulging disk in her neck, a result of her skiing injuries, had hampered her training. She worried about pollution and superbacteria in Rodrigo de Freitas Lagoon — the venue for sprint kayak — and even about the risk of contracting the Zika virus.
She resolved to reduce risks of infection and illness by using hand sanitizer and bug spray and by showering after leaving the water.
And she remembered her younger self, the one who lost the use of her legs and, for a while, her way. Nichols needed to set an example for her.
“I know that other young women need to see me be my best self,” she said. “When I struggle with self-doubt and feel like I can’t move on, I know there’s people out there who need me to do that. That’s motivating.”
