MADRID — After 10 years, one of the worst doping scandals in Spain continues to haunt the country’s athletes.
Operation Puerto, a 2006 investigation that exposed a doping network involving some of the world’s top cyclists, refuses to go away as a local court slowly continues the process of deciding whether hundreds of confiscated blood bags should be destroyed.
The announcement about the fate of the blood bags, which could stir up another scandal if identities of previously unscathed athletes are revealed, was expected last year, but it has been delayed, upsetting some Spanish athletes and local sports officials, who say the absence of closure on the case has further damaged the country’s image in the fight against doping.
“Whenever there has been people talking samples being destroyed, I think for Spanish sport, that’s terrible news,” the tennis player Rafael Nadal said. “Everything should be transparent, and the people that do wrong things should pay for it and people that do the things right should be better off. They should have a clean image.”
Nadal’s comments came not long after he had to deal with unproven doping accusations made against him by a former French minister. To defend his integrity, Nadal filed a defamation lawsuit against his accuser and asked the International Tennis Federation to make all of his antidoping test results publicly available.
“There has to be complete transparency in sport,” said Nadal, who will be Spain’s flag-bearer at the Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. “When things are not done the right way, they should be public. If not, we’re going to be speculating about unnecessary things, which is going to damage the image of the sport and sportsmen.”
The president of the Spanish Olympic committee, Alejandro Blanco, said that the longer it took for a decision on the blood bags to be announced, the worse it would be for Spanish sports and local athletes.
“Operation Puerto caused horror to our sport and to the image of the country,” Blanco said. “We’ve been dealing with this for 10 years, and it feels like it could be another 20. That can’t happen. It’s upsetting.”
It does not help that the World Anti-Doping Agency two months ago declared Spain to be “noncompliant” with its codes because it did not make required legal changes in connection with doping. Spain was unable to form a government after elections last year, so its Parliament has been unable to update the country’s antidoping legislation to match the revised WADA regulations.
Spain’s top sports official said the government had done its part by asking for the blood bags to be released, but noted that the court’s decision must be respected. Miguel Cardenal, president of the country’s Higher Sports Council, said Spain had made significant progress in the fight against doping despite the setbacks with Operation Puerto and the noncompliance ruling by WADA.
“I think that for the last few years, the public perception is that Spain does not tolerate doping,” Cardenal said. “Operation Puerto happened several years ago. The same result would have probably happened in other places, because at the time countries did not specify doping as a crime as they do now.”
Operation Puerto came to light when police seized coded blood bags from the Madrid clinic of a doctor, Eufemiano Fuentes, who worked with several top cyclists. In a trial in 2013, he was convicted of endangering public health and received a suspended one-year prison sentence for improperly performing blood transfusions on athletes. In addition, Fuentes’s sports medicine license was withdrawn for four years. Another defendant, a former cycling team director, was sentenced to four months in jail but also did not serve time. Both appealed.
More than 50 cyclists were originally linked to the case, and among the few eventually suspended were the former Tour de France winner Jan Ullrich, the Spanish Vuelta champion Alejandro Valverde and Ivan Basso, who later confirmed that his blood was among the frozen samples found in Operation Puerto.
Fuentes said during the trial that he had also worked with athletes from other sports, but Judge Julia Patricia Santamaria said Fuentes did not have to mention anybody who was not implicated in the cycling case.
The judge also ordered the destruction of the blood bags and other evidence, citing privacy laws, a decision that outraged the sports community at the time. Spain’s antidoping agency, the International Cycling Union and WADA were among the entities that appealed to have the blood bags released to be re-examined.
The Madrid court handling the case had said a verdict was reached late last year and a decision would be made public by the end of March. But since then, there has been no announcement, and no new timetable on when the decision will be announced. The court said it took time because the case had a complex appeals process, with several parties involved.
The delay has caused further speculation and increased criticism about Spain’s handling, even now, of doping.
