Tesla Motors is delivering its first sport utility vehicles, adding a second model to its lineup as it seeks to attract more buyers to its electric vehicles.
A late-evening event on Tuesday at its factory in Fremont, Calif., served to highlight the importance of the new vehicle, the Model X, for Tesla’s growth and future profitability. The show was vintage Tesla: an exuberant mix of technology, salesmanship and hype.
After two years of delays, the money-losing electric car company seemed eager to show it was moving ahead with plans to expand its catalog, which is currently limited to variations of its Model S sedan. The new luxury crossover is Tesla’s third vehicle, after the company stopped production of its first car, the Roadster.
“It’s important to show that any type of car can go electric,” Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla, said during the presentation, which lasted about 30 minutes. “We will show you we can do it with an S.U.V.”
Prices for the Model X start around $132,000. Tesla, which first announced the Model X in 2012, aimed to begin deliveries by 2013 but the project was delayed by the vehicle’s complexity and production challenges.
The arrival of the first purely electric sport utility vehicle comes as Americans once again want to buy bigger cars, according to Jessica Caldwell, the director of industry analysis at Edmunds.com. Trucks and S.U.V.s have outsold cars every month for the last two years, she said.
“The Model X is an opportunity for Tesla to expand its customer base by appealing to more female consumers, who make up a strong share of crossover S.U.V. buyers,” Ms. Caldwell said.
In addition to the Model S, which sells for around $90,000, Tesla is working on a third car, a more affordable sedan called the Model 3, which it plans to start delivering by the end of 2017 and with a price expected to start around $35,000.
“The real test for Tesla comes down the road when it launches the Model 3, when we’ll learn for sure if mainstream car buyers are ready to make the switch from gas to electric,” Ms. Caldwell said.
Tesla is building the Model X on the same factory line as the Model S, which the company acknowledged might create some production difficulties.
Mr. Musk has called the new vehicle “a particularly challenging car to build,” and last month, Tesla revised some its production goals. Tesla now plans to build a total of 50,000 vehicles this year, down from 55,000.
Tesla is counting on the success of the more expensive cars to help drive the acceptance of its electric technology and to help fund the development of its smaller car for the masses. The company has outlined a goal of selling 500,000 cars a year by 2020.
After long being ignored by big automakers, the electric car market is heating up. Automakers in Europe, Japan and the United States are all moving ahead with plans to build new vehicles.
General Motors said this year it would produce an all-electric car based on the Chevy Bolt concept presented in January at the Detroit Auto Show. The car, a hatchback model with a range of 200 miles, is expected to go on sale in 2017.
BMW also sells electric models, like the i3. Porsche recently unveiled a four-door electric car it plans to sell to the public. And in the latest sign of the growing endorsement of electric vehicles, Apple is reportedly planning its own electric car around 2020.
But Tesla can count on having a monopoly on the luxury crossover corner of the market for at least another year or two, until Audi releases its first electric S.U.V., the Q8 e-tron, which is planned for 2017. (It is too soon to say whether the problems at Volkswagen, which owns Audi, will affect those plans.)
The Tesla presentation started 55 minutes late, prompting comments online about the company’s tendency to miss its deadlines. But once the show kicked off, the large crowd cheered as Mr. Musk described the S.U.V.’s performance and features.
The most distinctive aspect of the vehicle, which seats seven people, is roof-hinged rear-passenger doors that flap open like bird wings. The so-called falcon doors, Mr. Musk said, provide access to a third row of seats when child seats are installed in the second row.
In response to concerns about how the doors might open in a parking garage, Mr. Musk said the car was equipped with sensors that calculate the height of any ceiling and open accordingly. “They also look cool,” he said.
The Model X has a range of 257 miles and a top speed of 155 miles per hour. The base model can reach 60 m.p.h. in 4.8 seconds. Another version of the car, with something called Ludicrous Mode, is even faster.
“This goes so fast it’s wrong,” Mr. Musk said. “This is an S.U.V., and it will do zero to 60 in 3.2 seconds.”
The car’s air filter also have a “biodefense” mode, which, according to Mr. Musk, keeps out viruses, bacteria and spores. “We try to be a leader in apocalyptic defense scenarios,” he joked.
