Thirty-four years ago, the boxing promoter Bob Arum was having lunch at the Friars Club with Carlos Barba, the manager of a Newark-based Spanish-language television station that would eventually become the broadcasting giant Univision.
Arum was bemoaning the slow ticket sales for his upcoming fight at Madison Square Garden between Davey Moore, a young middleweight champion from the Bronx, and Roberto Durán, the wildly popular ex-lightweight and welterweight champion from Panama.
“Bob, for a smart guy, you’re a dope,” Barba told him. “You got a huge Hispanic market in this town. You should be marketing this fight solely in the Hispanic media, and you should be selling Durán.”
“So in desperation, that’s what I did,” Arum said. “And we sold the place out.”
The result, Arum said, was “one of the most exciting nights of my career.”
“You couldn’t hear yourself talk in the Garden that night,” Arum added. “It was insane.”
In a major upset, Durán, who was considered washed up after having quit in the infamous “no más” fight against Sugar Ray Leonard and having lost two of his previous four bouts, won the fight with a knockout.
Watching the arena erupt in pandemonium, Arum realized that he had nearly missed a very lucrative bout.
“That fight really opened my eyes,” Arum said. “I realized this was the market. I realized this was my market.”
Ever since that night — June 16, 1983 — Arum has concentrated the bulk of his promotional efforts on selling Hispanic boxers to Hispanic fight fans. The rebirth of Durán led to the signing of Oscar De La Hoya, who led to the annual showcasing of Miguel Cotto at the Garden the weekend of New York City’s Puerto Rican Day parade, and eventually to a series of Mexico-based shows featuring Julio César Chávez Jr., the son of Mexico’s most revered boxer.
“I wouldn’t say Hispanics are the last loyal fan base in boxing,” Arum said. “But it is the most loyal fan base, because these people have never defected to other sports. Hispanic fans form the very hard core of the boxing business.”
On Saturday night — coinciding with the annual celebration of Cinco de Mayo weekend — two graduates of the Arum school of demographic targeting will cash in on that passion and loyalty. Chávez Jr. will challenge Saúl Álvarez, known as Canelo, the heir apparent to Chávez’s father among Mexican fight fans, in a middleweight bout promoted by De La Hoya under the banner of Golden Boy Promotions.
The bout has already sold out T-Mobile Arena in the Las Vegas area and could sell more pay-per-view subscriptions than any boxing match since the blockbuster 2015 bout between Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao.
But there is more to the appeal of the bout than the relative merits of the two fighters. “The passion we have for boxing is unbreakable,” De La Hoya said.
Or, as Rick Seara, a producer of Spanish-language TV boxing broadcasts who is the son of Cuban immigrants, said: “To us, soccer is God. And boxing is Jesus.”
Both De La Hoya and Seara were referring to Hispanic fight fans, and, in particular, those of Mexican and Mexican-American ancestry. A first-generation Mexican-American who grew up in East Los Angeles, De La Hoya could recall being taken as a 6-year-old boy by his father, Joel, to the weekly fights at Olympic Auditorium. Once there, he would sit in one section with other boys his age while the fathers sat in another.
“Where I grew up, it was just what you did,” he said. “On the night of a big fight, the whole family would get together to watch it, the way other families get together to watch the Super Bowl. Uncles, aunts, cousins, everybody would be there.”
De La Hoya’s father had been a professional boxer, as had his grandfather. His experience was similar to that of Álvarez, who was born in Guadalajara and followed his older brothers into the prize ring as a 10-year-old.
“Watching boxing together is a tradition for Mexican families,” Álvarez told The New York Times through email. “It’s something families can enjoy together. Family is very important in the Hispanic community, and I feel that boxing plays into that.”
The fact that both Álvarez and Chávez Jr. are natives of Mexico — Chávez is from Culiacán — gives the matchup an added appeal.
“Every time a Mexican fighter faces another countryman, fans know it’s going to be a great fight,” De La Hoya said. “They know they’re going to get their money’s worth. They know we fight with a lot of passion.”
De La Hoya knows those passions — and prejudices — painfully well: When he fought Chávez Sr. in 1996, he was vilified by many fans for not being “Mexican enough,” having grown up in the United States.
And although he now says he was “star-struck” when facing Chávez — whom he stopped on cuts in four rounds — Seara, who produced the international broadcast of the fight, said the perception of De La Hoya as a “pretty boy” prompted him to go toe to toe with Chávez in a rematch two years later, if only to prove that he was “just as Mexican” as Chávez.
That sense of pride in heritage has been woven throughout the fabric of professional boxing, from the Star of David sewn onto the trunks of the heavyweight champion Max Baer in the 1930s to emphasize his half-Jewish father to the many fighters who affixed “Irish” or “Italian” to their ring names to attract a larger fan base.
But nowhere is the sense of heritage in boxing stronger than among fighters of Hispanic origin. When De La Hoya fought Félix Trinidad of Puerto Rico in 1999 in Las Vegas, three flags — those of the United States, Mexico and Puerto Rico — were displayed in the arena.
“It’s all about national pride,” Seara said. “It’s not person against person, it’s nationality against nationality. Guys know they’re carrying a whole country on their shoulders.”
While the appeal of boxing has steadily waned during the past 20 years — coinciding roughly with the decline of Mike Tyson and the heavyweight division, along with the rise of mixed martial arts — the support of the Hispanic community has not wavered.
The three largest-selling pay-per-view boxing events — Mayweather-Pacquiao, Mayweather-De La Hoya and Mayweather-Álvarez — have all featured fighters with Hispanic ties in the main event. (Pacquiao, a Filipino, speaks fluent Spanish and is a favorite among Hispanic fight fans.)
Of the 25 largest pay-per-view events, 14 have featured Hispanic fighters, and if you subtract the 10 heavyweight matches on the list, every one of them has had at least one Hispanic fighter in the featured bout.
And while English-speaking networks such as ABC, NBC, CBS, ESPN, USA and Versus have jumped in and out of the boxing business during the past two decades, both Telemundo and Univision continue to feature boxing as part of their regular programming. “Boxeo Telemundo” is the longest continually running fight series on broadcast television, having presented a Friday night fight show every month for the past 25 years.
“Our ratings have actually gone up in the past three years, which is unheard-of for boxing,” said Tuto Zabala Jr., the producer of “Boxeo Telemundo.” “Our fans know their boxing. With a Hispanic fight crowd, you can’t fool anybody. They don’t care where you come from. If you’re stinking the place out, they’ll boo you out of the ring.”
Those fans expect to see the “Mexican” style of boxing, which, according to Álvarez, is “an aggressive type of boxing that comes forward and isn’t scared of getting hit.”
Or, as De La Hoya described it, “Sometimes you have to take two punches to land your one, and if you get dropped once, you better be sure to drop the other guy twice.”
De La Hoya believes the Álvarez-Chávez fight could attract one million pay-per-view purchases, less than a quarter of those for the Mayweather-Pacquiao (4.6 million), but still five times as many as for the March 18 Gennady Golovkin-Daniel Jacobs fight. Álvarez, who speaks little English, has an endorsement deal with Tecate, a Mexican beer, and one with Hennessy, a cognac not normally associated with boxing.
It is evidence of the potential crossover appeal of Álvarez, as well as recognition of the loyalty of a fan base to an athlete who represents more than just a sport.
Recalling that night so many years ago when Durán lit up Madison Square Garden, Arum’s memory of the fight was overshadowed by his memory of the passion of the crowd.
“The people went absolutely crazy,” he said. “They willed Durán back into relevance.”
The question is, can the Hispanic passion for boxing do the same for an entire sport?
