It has 16 goose feathers, sits on a stump of Portuguese cork and flies at up to 300 miles per hour, which makes the badminton shuttlecock one of the more curious pieces of sports equipment to be found anywhere.
And there’s this: Shuttlecocks, or shuttles for short, weigh only a few grams but must be durable enough to keep their shape even after players whack them as hard as they can.
In backyards around the world, badminton players often hit heavier, plastic shuttles that are designed to endure the constant abuse of amateurs. Professional shuttles, on the other hand, are made with demanding craftsmanship, and those are the ones that end up at the Olympics.
Yonex, which provides most of the badminton equipment being used at the Rio Games, shipped nearly 15,000 F-90 shuttles to Brazil from its factory outside Tokyo. Fans in the stands and viewers watching on television have no way of telling, but Yonex included four grades of shuttles, from slow to fast, that are deployed based on the conditions at the badminton venue, a boxy convention space with ceilings almost 40 feet high.
The shuttles vary in weight ever so slightly, and counterintuitively, the lighter shuttles fly slower because they wobble more. Which is where the science comes in.
Shuttles are chosen to align with the temperature and humidity at a competition. When the air is dense, the shuttles fly slower. In those cases, tournament officials choose a faster, or heavier, shuttle to compensate. By contrast, when the air is less dense, competition officials pick a slower, lighter shuttle.
To figure out which shuttle to use each day in Rio, a tournament referee and a representative from Yonex go to center court before the first match. On a recent morning, as a sprinkling of athletes and fans filed in to the building, Boris Reichel, who works for Yonex, took three No. 2 shuttles and three No. 3 shuttles and went to the service line.
He hit them with a gentle arc to the singles service line on the other side. The shuttles landed a few inches short. He then went to the other side and hit them back again. This time, they all landed closer to the line. Reichel figured that the shuttles had flown farther in that direction because of a draft coming from the doors that were opening on that side of the building.
The tournament referee was comfortable with that variable and determined that the faster No. 3 shuttles would be used that day.
“It’s important to make sure the players are playing under the best conditions because otherwise they wouldn’t focus on the game, but on the shuttles,” said Ronny De Vos, the deputy badminton referee at the Olympics.
De Vos, a cheerful Belgian who has worked his way up the badminton ranks over the past 25 years, said that while all the shuttles looked alike, an expert player could tell the difference by hitting them. Still, other than a number affixed to the tubes that hold a dozen shuttles at a time, there is nothing to indicate whether a shuttle is slower or faster.
The tubes are kept at what is widely referred to as shuttle control, which is little more than a table by the side of the court where a volunteer watches over the shuttles, stored in a cardboard box.
Elite players can tell if shuttles have even slight imperfections because they are harder to control. Like a pitcher who motions to the umpire for a new baseball, a badminton player can ask for a fresh shuttle and get one, although only with the consent of the umpire and the opponent.
At the Olympics, about two dozen shuttles are used in each match on average. About 90 percent of the time, Reichel said, there is nothing wrong with the shuttle, and players are asking to get a new one to gather themselves physically or mentally, or to break their opponent’s rhythm.
The shuttles themselves are intricate creations. Yonex orders thousands of goose feathers a year from China. The feathers are then trimmed to size and matched by color, flexibility and other factors. Only feathers from the left wings of geese are used in the tournament shuttles. Satoshi Yuza, a promotion manager at Yonex, chalked that up to aerodynamics.
“The contours and curvature of the left feathers allow the shuttle to spin and fly more consistently,” he said. “Lower-grade shuttles are made with other feathers from a goose or even duck feathers, and then formed to match a left-winged feather.”
Yonex takes all of this quite seriously. The company orders specially made cork from Portugal for use in making the cone of the shuttle. (Denser cork makes for a heavier, or faster, shuttle.) Once the 16 feathers are trimmed, they are stuck by hand into the cork. The feathers are laced together by a machine. The cork is then sealed with a durable white covering.
Here’s the special sauce: Yonex employs two or three experts at its factory in Japan who watch the shuttles fly out of a machine and then sort the shuttles by speed.
Yuza was asked if there were a lot of geese flying around China with no feathers on their left wings.
“The Chinese eat goose, so nothing is wasted,” he said.
