The holidays and all the fraught togetherness they can bring are now in the rearview mirror. But if you’re still smarting over that unkind word from a brother-in-law, or a passive-aggressive takedown from Mom or Dad, some solace may be found by attending a performance of “A Beautiful Day in November on the Banks of the Greatest of the Great Lakes,” a quirky comedy by Kate Benson that cleverly transforms an extended family’s Thanksgiving dinner into a fiercely fought competitive sport. 
Trust me, any tensions that arose between your siblings or cousins during the course of a family assembly will pale in comparison with the peculiar, ultimately macabre goings-on in Ms. Benson’s dark farce about the ego-devouring aspects of family life. 
The buffed wooden floor of the set, by Sara C. Walsh, resembles a basketball court, although the traditional markings are replaced by a more dizzying design. We appear to be inside a gym of some kind, but one equipped with a skybox, where two announcers — Ben Williams and Hubert Point-DuJour — provide play-by-play and color commentary on the action below them. In the course of the play’s 75-minute running time, their near-constant annotation of the interactions in a large family will surreally slide among images from football, baseball, racing, golf and other sports.
Dashing around the course, or the field, are three middle-aged sisters with names drawn from a vintage Betty Crocker dessert cookbook. Cheesecake (Brooke Ishibashi) is the host of this year’s feast, and so the responsibility of preparing most of the meal devolves onto her nervous shoulders. Her sisters, Cherry Pie (Heather Alicia Simms) and Trifle (Nina Hellman), help with arranging the furniture — whether the table will fit all the guests becomes an issue of serious contention — and also pitch in when Cheesecake is overwhelmed. 
The sisters’ interchangeable husbands, named Fred, Ed and Ned, make brief appearances, and their children (with goofy-generic names like Smilesinger, Republican and the Twins), along with their partners or husbands or wives, also scamper through the proceedings. These ancillary characters are portrayed, robustly if a little confusingly, by just two actors, Jessica Almasy and Christian Felix. 
The paterfamilias and materfamilias, called GrandDada (Gerry Bamman) and SnapDragon (Mia Katigbak) are also on hand, and a last-minute addition to the games is Gumbo (Kristine Haruna Lee), Cherry Pie’s divorced, sad-sack daughter, whose tendency toward mishap almost loses her a finger and will also have dire consequences for the turkey. 
As the absurd handles may suggest, Ms. Benson’s play, presented by New Georges (which first staged it last year with a somewhat different cast) in association with Women’s Project Theater, bears scant resemblance to the standard American Family Drama. No chintz-bedecked living room in sight. While much of the dialogue revolves around food being prepared and served (“And here they come with the deviled eggs, Republican in the lead, Smilesinger right behind and Cheesecake bringing up the rear...”), there isn’t a knife or fork onstage, either. 
Also absent is the kind of mano a mano conflict that typifies family-angst dramas: the heated arguments, the sour sniping, the drunken attacks. Oblique moments of tension erupt here and there, and the flustered Cheesecake seems to crumple under the pressure when her mother disapproves of the gravy. But mostly, the characters seem to exist in their own bubbles, with the actors usually delivering their lines facing the audience, often with minimal emotional inflection. The results resemble the demented love child that might result from the mating of “SportsCenter” with a Richard Maxwell play on fast-forward.
Drawing the most laughs is the commentary, delivered in expertly glib style by Mr. Williams and Mr. Point-DuJour. When a small contretemps erupts between Republican and wife, Mr. Williams leaps in with an excited bit of analysis: “And it’s Republican’s turn to try the abject expression of contrition! But no, he’s going to try for the brazen denial of reality!” 
Adds his co-announcer, impressed: “A bold move, but definitely a strong suit for Republican.” (Taking the madcap nomenclature irritatingly far, the announcer characters are denoted in program and script as @ and #. To which I say, $@%??#!!)
The staging, deftly orchestrated by Lee Sunday Evans, keeps the pace hectic, more like the frenzied traffic of a heated basketball game than another sport. The actors are remarkably at ease with Ms. Benson’s cartoonish characters, suggesting just enough humanity in the infrequent emotional passages to keep them from seeming like animated robots. Poor Gumbo, played with an amusingly wan sense of ineptitude by Ms. Lee, is the only one whose pathos can be palpably felt, although I had a pang for Cheesecake when she blames the loss of her sense of smell — a problem when you’re the chief cook — on “the ravages of time and motherhood.” 
Ms. Benson’s writing, Ms. Evans’s direction and the performances are completely in sync — like a soccer team playing up to World Cup level — but “A Beautiful Day” ultimately wins more points for style than for substance. Although Ms. Benson possesses a strikingly original voice, her play, for all its daffy wordplay and eerie surrealism, strikes me as being heavy on gravy and skimpy with the turkey. 
