On Friday, Tory Burch will open the first store for Tory Sport, her activewear line, among the Flatiron district’s many boutique fitness studios. It’s your one-stop shop for everything from compression leggings ($110) to a Coolmax cashmere tennis logo sweater ($325). At 129 Fifth Avenue.
On Sunday, the Parisian jeweler Aurélie Bidermann will open her second New York shop, where you’ll find a continuation of the bitten apple series she introduced at her SoHo space, as well as a sweet collection of animal charms in 18-karat gold, with diamonds, pearls, and sapphire or tsavorite. At 957 Madison Avenue.
On Tuesday, Kate Spade New York will open a pop-up for its new home line, which features polka dots splashed on everything from desks ($3,095) to teakettles ($50), along with other cheery motifs. At 411 West Broadway.
And be sure to stop by the remodeled DKNY store down the street, where the label’s creative directors, Maxwell Osborne and Dao-Yi Chow, show off such clever riffs on ’90s power dressing as a pinstripe jacket ($995) worn not with pants but over a bodysuit ($255). At 420 West Broadway.
Timo Weiland is the first designer to collaborate with Banana Republic and the CFDA on a limited-edition capsule collection as part of a new program that supports emerging talents who design and produce in America. Mr. Weiland’s 12-piece spring assortment, available this week, includes a chambray tie-waist crop top ($128) and matching pencil skirt ($148). At 105 Fifth Avenue.
The latest Misha Nonoo capsule collection for Aldo Rise includes refined yet functional canvas flatforms ($90) and strappy stacked-heel mules ($150) with a ’70s-leaning vibe. At Aldo, 579 Broadway.
The new Monique Lhuillier for Pottery Barn Kids collection of home décor and furnishings is inspired by the designer’s love for the fantasy of special-occasion dressing and includes princess-worthy bits like a plush rocker ($199) and a petal canopy ($199). At 1311 Second Avenue.
Saks Fifth Avenue is showcasing lavish costumes from the second season of the Starz 18th-century period drama “Outlander” — there’s a floral dressage gown made from 15 yards of fabric in gorgeous colors worn with butter leather gloves and an enormous hat covered in silk flowers — in a series of six window vignettes.
