He wrote a report that has prompted demands by antidoping officials for Russia to be banned from next month’s Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. Russian officials have called him a liar and a part of a Western plot to denigrate their nation.
Richard McLaren, a soft-spoken Canadian law professor, laid the groundwork for Russia’s potential Olympic ban with the release of his report, commissioned by the World Anti-Doping Agency, that documented how Russia’s elaborate state-sponsored doping scheme corrupted the results of the last two Olympics and tainted numerous athletic competitions.
The International Olympic Committee had said Tuesday that it was exploring the possibility of a “collective ban” on Russian athletes at the games, which begin on Aug. 5, but that it would wait for a ruling from the Court of Arbitration for Sport on Russia’s track and field team before taking any sweeping action against the country’s athletes. On Thursday, the court upheld a ban on the country’s track and field team.
The ruling, after vociferous denials from Russia and intense pressure from world antidoping officials, has once again put Mr. McLaren in the center of the geopolitical arena of international sport — facing off, indirectly, against none other than President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.
Mr. McLaren, 70, seems well equipped for the challenge. A respected lawyer from London, Ontario, he has spent much of the last 15 years focused on ethics in sport as an arbitrator in five Olympic Games and through his involvement in many sports inquiries and disputes. These include a watershed doping investigation of Major League Baseball, which resulted in what became known as the Mitchell report, and one last year for the antidoping agency that found systemic use of performance-enhancing drugs by Russian athletes in the 2014 Sochi Olympics.
“That’s why they chose me,” he said in an interview this week. “It takes a lot of experience to know how to conduct these types of investigations, to know what to look for.”
Despite his international reputation, Mr. McLaren is far more used to being surrounded by his students, known as “McLarenites,” at the law school of Western University in London, where he teaches courses on business, sport and banking law.
In interviews, Mr. McLaren’s colleagues described him as a dogged and ethical lawyer skilled at leveraging decades of legal experience and jurisprudence in the sometimes messy realm of athletics, whether it is resolving doping disputes as a member of the International Court of Arbitration for Sport in Switzerland, deciding cases involving cyclists and kayakers for the Sport Dispute Resolution Center of Canada or investigating accusations on behalf of the antidoping agency.
“He’s unwavering in his principles but he’s not naïve,” said W. Iain Scott, the dean of Western University’s law school.
Colleagues say that breadth of experience has given Mr. McLaren the fortitude to brush off criticism like that of Dmitry Nosov, a Russian judo Olympian and politician who said that every word out of Mr. McLaren’s mouth “is soaked in lies and hypocrisy” after the release of the report on Monday, according to a report in the Russian newspaper Sport Express.
Mr. Putin sought to cast the report as a plot intended “to make sports an instrument of geopolitical pressure — to formulate a negative image of countries and peoples,” according to a statement on his official website.
Mr. McLaren sounded unperturbed. “I took on the work knowing I would receive that kind of abuse,” he said, referring to the Sochi investigations.
The team behind the 57-day inquiry and 103-page document included professional investigators and one of Mr. McLaren’s former students, who is fluent in Russian. Mr. McLaren said his team had begun writing exactly a week before they published the document, working 10- or 11-hour days in the offices of a Montreal law firm that had offered them space.
Mr. McLaren, who was born in Hamilton, Ontario, said he was an avid sportsman, playing basketball and football through college at Western University, though now he says he sticks mostly to tennis. “I’ve always had a strong belief in fair sportsmanlike competition,” he said.
He first investigated doping in the early 2000s. Mr. McLaren spent nearly a year investigating American track and field athletes over allegations that positive drug tests had been covered up, but found no such evidence.
Mr. McLaren’s work investigating allegations of match-fixing and doping in professional sports has produced a dose of cynicism in his worldview. “I look at a lot of sports and sports results with a jaded eye because I know what’s going on sometimes behind the scenes,” he said.
Such intimate knowledge of athletic malfeasance has bolstered his passion for arbitration. Mr. McLaren said that he agreed to help found the Sport Dispute Resolution Center, an arbitration and mediation organization, because he was tired of seeing sports administrators make team decisions based on favoritism. “It enables athletes to have an independent system that will give them fair justice,” he said.
Besides his professional credentials, Mr. McLaren is an appealing investigator and arbitrator to world sports organizations for another reason: He is Canadian. “There would be a lot of suspicion in geopolitical circles if an American or U.S. agency took the lead on an international investigation,” said Bill Smith, a professor at the University of Idaho who specializes in global sport and international affairs. “Some countries would think the U.S. was trying to ensure its place on the podium like in trade or geopolitics.”
According to Mr. Smith, Canada has worked strategically to build a trusted reputation in international sports, especially through its efforts to root out doping that began after a Canadian sprinter, Ben Johnson, tested positive for a banned steroid and was stripped of his gold medal at the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
Geopolitics were a serious concern for the antidoping agency when it set up an independent commission in 2014 to investigate allegations of Russian doping. Mr. McLaren, along with another Canadian, Richard W. Pound, the agency’s founding president, and a German police official produced a scathing report that detailed a widespread cover-up by Russian athletes and officials.
The investigations required a number of cloak-and-dagger precautions: a secure email system, extra secure cellphones and, Mr. McLaren said, shadow surveillance personnel who followed him on certain occasions. “I think other members of my family were more concerned for my personal security than I was,” he said.
With the investigation largely wrapped up, Mr. McLaren said he was looking forward to spending the rest of his summer on decidedly more low-key pursuits. “I plan to go to the cottage that I rented on Lake Huron and put my feet up,” he said.
