No! Oh, my God! Boooooooo! Children wept, women howled, and hefty men in Knicks jerseys thrust thumbs down as if auditioning as extras for “Gladiator II.”
The stink of unspeakable betrayal hung over Barclays Center on Thursday evening.
Phil Jackson, Zen Phil, had just made the decision to draft a talented 7-foot-1 Latvian waif by the name of Kristaps Porzingis. Who had an unrecognizable surname. Who was a European. The horror.
Porzingis rage swept the house.
A less than gratifying aspect of being a born-and-bred New Yorker is listening as our tribal, irrational selves rain down invective on some European kid who committed the sin of being insufficiently well known at an N.B.A. draft-a-thon. 
Porzingis, who speaks Latvian, Spanish and excellent English (I can match him word for word in English), took our atavism in stride. He smiled and praised our “passion.”
“It’s a basketball city — they boo you; they cheer you,” he said Friday, perched on a stool at the Knicks’ training complex, dressed in a suit and blue suede shoes. “There’s nothing like them.”
On some days, maybe that is just as well.
Our occasional xenophobic impulse is a curious affliction as the N.B.A. — the top league in a global sport, with headquarters in our most global city — is awash in global talent. More than a few of its exemplars are European. Pau and Marc Gasol, Tony Parker, Marcin Gortat, Goran Dragic, Giannis Antetokounmpo, Nikola Vucevic and Dirk Nowitzki would make an excellent eight-man rotation.
If we cast farther afield, to Africa and South America, we could field several teams with talent light-years ahead of the team that the Knicks put on the floor last season. Each year, by the way, three or four American players are drafted in the first round and more or less flunk out immediately.
It’s worth noting that New Yorkers have done this before. In 2008, the Knicks drafted a 19-year-old Italian kid, and the boos washed down across that draft stage like water from a swollen creek. 
This Knicks draft pick, a Daily News reporter wrote, “went over about as well as week-old lasagna.”
That kid, Danilo Gallinari, turned into a fine N.B.A. forward. 
Let me pause to acknowledge the obvious: Jackson has tossed the cosmic dice here. Quite a few respected basketball minds view Porzingis as the sleeper of the draft, but he will not fully awaken next season. The teenager is still growing, his frame rail thin. Does the Latvian need to inhale protein shakes? No doubt.
Jackson showed up at Friday’s news conference looking dapper in a gray shirt and black suit, with black Nike sneakers with an elfin cut to them. Asked if he expected Porzingis, who weighed 233 pounds at a recent workout, to gain weight, he played the sophisticate.
“I think another stone,” he said. Two stone even.
A stone is a unit of measurement in Britain; one stone equals 14 pounds.
Jackson said he’d asked his former Lakers star Pau Gasol, a Spaniard, about the weight. “He says he weighed 227 when he was drafted by the Grizzlies, and he was approximately the same height” as Porzingis, Jackson said.
More to the point, this skinny teenage Latvian shoots 25-foot jumpers like layups and possesses impressive footwork and a 38-inch vertical leap, which allows him to essentially stuff his elbows into the hoop.
Porzingis’s older brother and agent, Janis, was on hand at the Knicks’ Westchester gym. Tall and blond, although not so much as his little brother, Janis said that long ago the Porzingis family contracted a serious case of the basketball jones. Dad, a ruggedly cut, middle-aged gent, played pro ball in the old Soviet system until he was 38; Mom was an incandescent star in the female game in Latvia, although she stopped hooping once she started having kids.
Janis recently retired after playing 12 years in European leagues, the last five in Italy. He says little brother Kristaps threw down his first Nerf ball dunk when he was an 11-month-old. As for American complaints that some European players lack sufficient verve?
“It’s very true about the skill level; American players are usually more athletic and powerful,” Janis said. “So you have to figure out what skillwise you have to compete.”
Janis added: “There are some who do really bad. And there are great examples of guys who excel. Kristaps intends to excel.”
Right now, the rookie’s biggest headache could be the displeasure of the Knicks’ alpha dog, Carmelo Anthony. Anthony has been on a knee-repair sabbatical. But according to reports in The Daily News and on radio, he feels misled. A 31-year-old star, he expected the Knicks to harvest immediate help from the draft. The thought that he’ll line up alongside a teenager apparently bugs him.
Capitalism is a devious mistress. Last summer, Anthony, who is a superb scorer, became a free agent. Wherever he turned, he could make himself rich beyond comprehension. He could take nearly $130 million from the Knicks, or he could take marginally fewer dollars and play for a contender in Chicago or Los Angeles.
Anthony, as he is wont to do, went for the max money and chose New York. I dig my city: It has excellent clubs, museums, restaurants and a mayor who finds everything about us transcendent. The Strand is the best secondhand bookstore in the nation.
It so happens we also have a bummer of a professional basketball team.
Anthony knew this. Yet Stephen A. Smith, of ESPN and radio fame, hurried on the air Friday and said his impeccable “sources” told him that Anthony “feels absolutely hoodwinked and betrayed by Phil Jackson.”
Two points intrude. Last summer, Smith’s “sources” told him that Anthony was absolutely not going to sign with the Knicks. “He’s gone,” Smith said. Second, Anthony draws a weekly Knicks paycheck of close to $500,000.
If that’s hoodwinked, I want some of it.
A reporter asked Jackson about Anthony. Jackson purred. “Carmelo is always on my mind,” he said. “He’s our favorite son. At this point in his life, that’s the way it should be.
“But the second most important thing is what we do for this franchise, and that has to be a consideration,” Jackson said. “And I let him know that.”
Jackson’s smile was avuncular, not to mention steel fortified.
For now, Porzingis will work on his own attitude, with an eye toward adding spikes. Janis was asked how often he beat his little brother in games of one on one. He last won two years ago, Janis said, but that was because little brother made a tactical mistake.
“He shot from the outside,” Janis said. “He shouldn’t have done that. He should have finished me.”
Janis paused.
“Now he finishes me off every time.”
Those are words to quicken the heart of even the most xenophobic New Yorker.
