Morgan Krell, a 17-year-old wearing sunglasses and a cap, approached a dirty pond protected by tall reeds in Flushing Meadows Corona Park in Queens with his fly rod in hand. The Van Wyck Expressway whined above him and the World’s Fair Unisphere was visible in the distance. He nodded toward a plastic bag floating in the filthy water.
“Snakehead,” he said. “If there’s snakehead in this park, they live here. They love it dirty.”
Morgan cast his fly rod majestically, sending line curling through the air, as a family barbecued nearby and an ice cream truck chimed its tune. His feathery lure — designed to look like a small tasty frog — plopped onto the water. He waited for a bite. Nothing. “Water is playing tricks on me,” he muttered. “I have to keep moving.”
A neglected sign with an illustration of the fish he was after stood nearby. Its message, highlighted in red, began: “If you catch this fish, do not release. It is highly invasive and a threat to the ecosystem.”
Northern snakeheads are vicious predators that originate from Asia (a sign was also posted in Korean), and they have become a reviled invasive species in America. Their nightmarish set of abilities has given them a villainous reputation: they can slither across land, they thrive in dirty water, and they can survive outside of water for days, not to mention they are sharp-toothed alpha hunters that can ravage ecosystems they don’t belong in. State law requires anglers to kill any snakeheads they capture.
For reasons left to speculation, the lakes in Flushing Meadows Corona Park hold a small population of snakeheads, and as of late, Morgan Krell has become consumed with a kind of quest: becoming the first person (as far as he knows) to catch a snakehead with a fly rod in New York City. “It’s an unexplored frontier,” he said. “I dream about the fish at night. I see it in the water. Then a tail kick. And then it’s gone.”
In many ways, Morgan is like any 17-year-old boy in New York. He’s busy with college applications and he shares his life on Instagram. But his Instagram is filled with photos of him catching trout in streams, and his room in his parent’s apartment on the Upper West Side is filled with toys and boxes of Legos alongside fishing rods and colorful lures and shiny tackle. Trophies from bass fishing tournaments sit on his windowsill, and he does his homework on the same table where he makes flies by hand.
“That boy is always with his fishing rods,” said a doorman in his building’s lobby recently, and his father, Ira, remarked of his son’s obsession: “Someone came up to me at a family gathering and told me, ‘Morgan says he wants to become a fisheries biologist. Not a doctor or a dentist. Are you sure he’s Jewish?’”
Morgan, who is a senior at the Bronx High School of Science, caught his first largemouth bass in Central Park when he was 14. Since then, he has undertaken a series of New York-centric fishing challenges: he caught a striped bass on a fly in Long Island, he landed a rare mirror carp in Central Park, and has gotten local bluegills with Wonder Bread. His chase for the snakehead, he said, is simply his next challenge. “Fishing is about obsession,” he explained. “I spent two and a half years trying to catch a pike. I finally caught that pike. So the thing I was obsessed with is finally over. I needed a new obsession.”
Northern snakeheads began appearing in America over a decade ago. They attained notoriety in New York when several were found in Central Park in 2013. But those fish are said to have died out, and Flushing Meadows Corona Park is believed to be the last place with a substantial population of the fish left in the city. Although no one knows for certain how they got into these parks, a common speculation is that they were planted to breed for gastronomic purposes: snakeheads are prized for their sweet meat in Asia and are also believed to have healing properties (on the eve of the 2010 Chinese New Year, 353 live snakeheads were seized at Kennedy International Airport).
George Jackman, an aquatic ecologist for the New York City Department of Parks, said the fish’s “villain status” has been sensationalized. “They are evolutionary marvels,” he said. “I feel sad in some ways they have to be killed because they are such impressive fish.” He recalled a research expedition at Flushing Meadows Corona Park during which several snakeheads were captured. “I remember when we had a bunch of them in a cooler,” he said. “And they were slamming against it trying to get out. Other fish would have accepted their fate.”
On a recent sunny Saturday, Morgan rode a 7 train from Times Square to get to Queens, and he seemed accustomed to passengers scowling at his gear and fishing rod. He’d immersed himself in research about snakeheads. “A bass might engulf a whole frog at once,” he said as the train rollicked, “but a snakehead might bite the frog’s legs off and then come back to finish it off. Like a shark.” He continued, “If I get one I have to kill it and cut its head off. I’m not looking forward to that.” At the park, Morgan started methodically working his way through the lake, casting in a fetid pond beneath the Van Wyck, then fishing inside smelly trash-filled culverts, before reaching the lake’s glistening main body of water. But it was within those dark, filthy side pockets, he said, that the fish could be found.
He parted fields of tall reeds with his fly rod to access these remote corners of the lake, and he found that he was not alone. Quiet old men wearing brim hats were already planted deep within the reeds, holding rods over the water and sitting on plastic buckets in the mud, crushed packets of Chinese cigarettes at their side. They spoke no English and seemed irritated by the young intruder, but some of them offered him advice.
Morgan showed one of them a photograph of the snakehead on his cellphone. The man exclaimed the fish’s name in Mandarin and pointed to a northern section of the lake. Another angler perched within the reeds suggested that Morgan was too late. “Now not good,” he said. “Summer better. Fish is gone.”
After hundreds of futile casts, finally, Morgan found one. Or he thought he did. “I just saw one,” he cried out. “It looked like a small dragon. But I spooked it.” The snakehead’s scaly brown body, apparently, had slithered away.
Dejected, he returned to Manhattan. His aunt was visiting from Florida and he needed to make it home for dinner. He returned the next weekend, but the fish eluded him again. He looked on with envy as two boys fishing on a bridge with worms kept reeling in tiny white perch. The young angler calculated his failure. “I must be too late,” he said. “They’ve gone to deeper water. I’ve read about this. I’ll come back in the spring.”
But maybe it didn’t matter. He was already thinking about his next quest. “There’s a small pond way out on the border in Queens,” he said. “You can’t even find it on a subway map. I’ve heard it used to be stocked with brook trout a long time ago. But it’s totally forgotten now. There might still be one or two trout left. Maybe I can catch one.”
He liked the sound of the idea. “I could become the first person to catch a trout in the five boroughs.”
