OCEANPORT, N.J. — Outside the paddock before Sunday’s William Hill Haskell Invitational, the crowd angling for an up-close look at American Pharoah was, in some places, more than 20 people deep. The fans held their camera phones high. Some stood on their tiptoes, even if the reward was to catch just a glimpse of the colt’s shiny bay coat.
One group of spectators had a better perch: about two dozen women lined up at the giant windows of the grandstand’s fifth-floor restroom. And while waiting there, the women talked and talked about the horse who, in June, had become the first Triple Crown winner in 37 years.
“It’s crazy that he’s got to race again,” said Ashlee Petroski, who works with the Rowan University equestrian team. “Hasn’t he done what he was supposed to do? Oh, why don’t they let him be just a horse?”
Tamara Hernandez, 42, who works in construction, piped in: “I know. God forbid he gets hurt. He is just amazing and just perfect, and it would crush me to see him broken. But he’s here because people are greedy.”
Excellent points.
American Pharoah, who easily won the Haskell at Monmouth Park by two and a quarter lengths, had already brought glory and money to his owner, Ahmed Zayat. And because of that, there was a very strong argument to make that he had earned the right to spend the rest of his life in the stallion barn, far away from the track and the prospect of injury or even death, which could come because of something as simple as a misstep.
On Sunday, Zayat didn’t say whether his beloved horse would run again, although the odds are that American Pharoah is far from done. Zayat did tell me that he feels compelled to run the colt again, despite the threat of injury.
Zayat said good trainers — like Pharoah’s, Bob Baffert — could prevent injuries because they could tell if a horse wasn’t healthy enough to run. How that could prevent a horse from the fluke of a bad step, I don’t know. But Zayat said he was more nervous that his Triple Crown winner would lose and disappoint the fans than he was about potential injuries.
“He was born to run, so we owe him that,” Zayat said. “He feels good about winning. You can see it in his eyes.”
There’s also money to be made by sending American Pharoah to the track again and again. Purses. Sponsorships.
Zayat said he had sold American Pharoah’s breeding rights before the horse won the Triple Crown. By doing so, he most likely lost out on a fortune; those rights could have been exponentially higher after the victory.
Since then, though, his horse has been doing an amazing job at making up for that loss. On Sunday, American Pharoah brought Zayat a $1.1 million paycheck. He also brought an announced crowd of more than 60,000 to Monmouth Park, energizing a sport that has been fading in recent decades.
Not long after the grandstands opened at 9 a.m., people were lined up at souvenir stands to buy American Pharoah-themed gear. T-shirts. Caps. Shot glasses. Even a big foam hand with its index finger raised and “#1 American Pharoah” printed on it.
I headed to the Haskell to see the horse in person because I hadn’t covered the Belmont Stakes, the race in which American Pharoah made history.
Long before that race, I had booked a flight to Canada to cover the Women’s World Cup. I planned to travel on the day of the Belmont, thinking the odds were in my favor that there would be no Triple Crown winner.
On race day, I woke up with regret. Because nothing in sports, absolutely nothing, is more beautiful than seeing horses run — especially horses who could win the Triple Crown.
There’s the snorting sound as they push air out of their nostrils. And the moment that they are completely off the ground, their four legs curled beneath them before they reach out to take their next stride. And the way their coats glisten with sweat, with their long tails flying in the slipstream behind them.
That magnificence is partly why I fell in love with horses. When I was a kid, my father took me to the Meadowlands to watch them run. And then came my obsession. At 11, I took care of a quarter horse named Stardust for a friend of my mother’s and spent every day at the stable. Taped onto the closet doors in my bedroom were photos of famous horses, like War Admiral, and famous jockeys, like Laffit Pincay Jr. On my bookshelf was the entire Black Stallion series and a collection of Breyer figurines, including one of Kelso, one of the best racers in history.
The romance vanished when I saw Eight Belles break down at the Kentucky Derby in 2008 and watched Barbaro break his leg at the Preakness Stakes in 2006. Athletes, especially ones who don’t have a say in the matter, shouldn’t die for their sport.
During a layover on my way to Canada, I read that the 4-year-old Helwan had broken down in the final turn of an earlier race at Belmont Park and had been euthanized on the track.
My heart dropped. Suddenly, missing race day didn’t seem so bad.
After Helwan died, did some people continue to party in anticipation of the Triple Crown? Yes. Was he just collateral damage? Yes. It’s sickening that an animal’s death would go virtually unnoticed, but unfortunately, it happens all the time.
On Saturday alone, three horses died while training and racing at Saratoga Race Course in New York, according to the New York State Gaming Commission’s database. The same day, the 52nd running of the Jim Dandy Stakes was held there.
At Monmouth, while waiting in the restroom to see American Pharoah, Hernandez told me about her Belmont day. She had been there to see Helwan break down. Then, with only a thin veil of black mesh separating him from view, she saw him euthanized and couldn’t help breaking into tears.
“A lot of fans left the track,” she said. “But I love horses, so I went back. That’s why I’m here at Monmouth. Now I cross my fingers when American Pharoah is out there. It’s just what you have to do.”
American Pharoah was fine on Sunday. Actually, more than fine. He galloped around the track, legs churning in a soothing rhythm, as if he knew he would win. Seriously, did he even break a sweat?
His victory caused one fan to yell, “He’s a monster!” Another shouted, “He’s not even trying!”
In a sport with a good side and a very dark side, the race could have been unequivocally breathtaking and joyous. But only if you wore blinders.
