RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — Lexi Thompson and Jordan Spieth represented the United States as teenagers in a mixed four-ball match at the 2008 Junior Ryder Cup. As Spieth remembered it, Thompson carried the pair. He described her as “almost unbeatable.” Eight years later, Thompson and Spieth are carrying American golf as the highest-ranked American players in the world.
But now that they are professionals, their paths rarely cross. Thompson, 21, the women’s world No. 3, and Spieth, 22, the men’s world No. 2, were reunited last month in New York to promote the Masters’ youth golf initiative, the Drive, Chip and Putt finals, to be held Sunday at Augusta National. “I haven’t seen him in forever,” Thompson said, “so it was great to catch up.”
Why do boys and girls play sports together only to be segregated as adults? There would seem no better way to promote sport and dispel sexist presumptions than through combined-gender competitions, though the strategic alliance recently formed by the PGA Tour and the Ladies Professional Golf Association comes across as faintly retro, given the forces fomenting revolution in the sports world.
While the two United States-based golf tours explore the potential development of joint events in golf, members of the women’s national soccer team are suing its federation for equal pay and the International Olympic Committee has discussed adding more events that would feature men and women competing on the same team and sometimes against one another.
The European Tour and Ladies European Tour have plans to stage a joint event in Morocco in May. In February, the P.G.A. Tour of Australasia teamed with Australian Ladies Professional Golf to hold the Victorian Open, an event in which men and women played simultaneously on two courses, in separate competitions, for equal prize money.
With the American tours playing catch-up, a bold strategy is the only play. Perhaps no one is better positioned to effect change than Ty Votaw, the PGA Tour’s executive vice president and chief global communications officer, and a former L.P.G.A. commissioner.
“I think what we have to think about in this alliance is that anything is possible and not be constrained by the attitude ‘That’s not how we do things’ or ‘That’s never been done before’ or any other challenges, recognizing there will be challenges,” Votaw said. “Those shouldn’t be reasons we don’t work hard to overcome them.”
From 1960 to 1966 and again from 1976 through 1999, the PGA and L.P.G.A. Tours sponsored a mixed team event, the JCPenney Classic, during golf’s slow season. The event was popular with the players, but the alliance can — and must — think bigger.
The main obstacle to a men’s and women’s combined event is finding a site with two championship-caliber courses whose design puts the women on equal footing with the men.
The Australian Karrie Webb, a 41-time winner on the L.P.G.A. Tour, figured that the logistics were too big a hurdle. Then Webb, 41, played this year’s Victorian Open. The event featured two full fields using two courses and alternating groups between men and women.
The 36-hole cut was the top 50 and ties, and there was also a 54-hole cut. “It’s a great concept, and it worked,” Webb said. “And I think the crowd loved it, too, because they don’t have to choose who to follow. If they sit at one green, they can see men and women coming through.”
Rory McIlroy, the former world No. 1 from Northern Ireland, liked the format used in Pinehurst, N.C., for the 2014 men’s and women’s United States Opens, played in back-to-back weeks on the famed No. 2 course. The same setup will be used this summer when golf returns to the Olympics.
“That worked well,” McIlroy said, adding, “It would help the women get a little bit more exposure, and so in a way it would be great for the game.”
Another possibility is holding a combined event on one course, with the men and the women playing on alternate days. “I guess having a day in between play is fine, because that’s what happens in the Grand Slams of tennis,” McIlroy said. Whatever form it takes, he added, he’s amenable to combined men’s and women’s events.
The enthusiasm of top players like the 26-year-old McIlroy is essential, said Billie Jean King, a former world No. 1 tennis player who won 39 titles in majors in singles or doubles. King, who formed the Women’s Tennis Association in 1973 and battled for equal pay in the sport, said, “Let’s face it, it’s the men who have to help us change it.”
King added: “People who are in the power position, they feel if they are sharing, they are losing. I keep trying to explain to them, they’re not losing anything because it will improve the popularity of the sport. If we make the pie bigger, everyone wins.”
Stacey Allaster, the former chief executive of the WTA who recently became the U.S.T.A.’s chief executive for professional tennis, said the sport’s corporate partners were clamoring for more combined men’s and women’s events.
“I’ve got to believe it’s no different in golf,” Allaster said, adding, “It’s reflective of the society we live in.”
Mission Hills Country Club in Southern California, where the winner of the first major of the year in women’s golf will be crowned Sunday, is 12 miles from Indian Wells Tennis Garden, which annually hosts the top men’s and women’s players in the world in a combined event that is a notch below the majors in importance. On the morning of the men’s and women’s finals at last month’s tennis tournament, Raymond Moore, the chief executive and tournament director, made disparaging comments about the WTA and its players that flew in the face of tennis’s progressive efforts to recognize men and women equally.
The male-dominated sports landscape provides fertile soil for the gender-bias seeds sowed by Moore, who resigned the next day. Two days before the start of the women’s first major here, Annika Sorenstam appeared as a panelist at the inaugural Women in Sports Conference at Mission Hills. The moderator, the American former soccer star Julie Foudy, asked Sorenstam about her experience playing in a PGA Tour event at Colonial Country Club in Texas in 2003.
Sorenstam, a 10-time major champion, said that early in the tournament week, she was approached on the range by one of her fellow competitors, who snidely offered to show her how to hit a slice. Sorenstam, unimpressed by the remark, said she told the player she didn’t need any help shaping shots.
Appearing on the panel with Sorenstam was the Olympic champion Alpine skier Lindsey Vonn, who has said she would like to compete in the downhill against men, whom she has beaten in training. Before taking the stage, Vonn said she rarely ran into the men during competitions. They often don’t ski the same mountain, much less the same racecourse.
Vonn said she supported men’s and women’s combined events in all sports, including hers. It promotes respect and understanding between the genders, she said, and it’s beneficial for the fans.
“I think that’s why women’s tennis is so popular,” Vonn said. “You can see the top men and women compete on the same day. You in turn gather more followers for the sport.”
Imagine if the members of the PGA Tour got to see the next Tiger Woods on a semiregular basis. That might be Lydia Ko, a New Zealander with 11 L.P.G.A. Tour victories, including one major, before her 19th birthday.
Ko, who was born in South Korea 11 days after Woods’s victory in the 1997 Masters, said she would love to cross cart paths with the men more often.
“Just because you’re a girl doesn’t necessarily mean you’re going to have one girl role model,” Ko said. “So I think it’s great for the juniors that they might be able to see us play together, the PGA and the L.P.G.A. and go, ‘Wow, you know, that’s a pretty cool team’ or ‘Wow, that’s so cool.’ ”
