THE SPORT OF KINGSBy C. E. Morgan545 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $27.
The first time I saw a horse trainer “steal” a race — by shipping a horse more talented than it looked in its past performance chart to a track far from home and cashing a bet on it — I was standing at the rail when a crowd of angry bettors turned not on the trainer but on the (this time) blameless jockeys. The jockey who had lost on the favorite was named Delgado. “I hope the sweatbox pops you like a chili bean and refries you to hell, you Cuban devil,” someone yelled. I was new to the track and was startled by the horseplayer’s choice of words. It was my introduction to the widespread delusion that jockeys, with their compact bodies and wizened and secretive faces, are in league with the Devil in this most devilish of games.
The Mephistopheles figure in “The Sport of Kings,” a novel that abounds with Faustian characters and dangerous learning, is a jockey himself. Reuben Bedford Walker III is black (a “noble Ebon,” in his own characteristically purple phraseology), “the best rider you’ll ever see on the skin of a horse,” and the possessor, like the author C. E. Morgan, of a boundless breadth of knowledge on the darker history of humans and horses in Kentucky, including the fact that African-American jockeys, though nowadays as rare as fair play, once dominated the sport.
This riverine, gorgeously textured novel is highly ambivalent about the encyclopedic knowledge that it delivers. Faust, you will recall, was the most learned doctor of his age, but learning only made him restless for more, so he made a pact with the Devil. Reuben knows all there is to know and flashes it with the hypnotic razzmatazz of a carnival barker, for nobody’s benefit but his own. Eloquence is ever the Devil’s art.
Three Kentucky lineages converge in the novel: one white, one black, one equine. The Forges are the “kings” of the title — Bluegrass aristocrats of apparently limitless wealth. In the 1950s, their plantation is in the hands of John Henry Forge, a corn grower, who finds horse breeding showy and vulgar. He forbids any venture into it by his only son, Henry, who both hates his domineering father and resembles him. No sooner is his father dead than Henry puts the Forge fortune into breeding the perfect thoroughbred in the family mold. Similarly, Henry raises his only child, Henrietta, as his female likeness, and makes her the manager of Forge Run Farm.
But Henrietta, possibly the most intellectually resplendent heroine I’ve met in a novel, outgrows Henry’s plans for her. Her Faustian aspect is her insatiable, almost crazed appetite to understand everything: “What roused her to an almost pained interest, what caused her to copy down long passages into her notebooks and stay awake into the night, her mind running like a stallion on a track, was the mystery of the earth’s composition and all of its inhabitants. . . . She slowly discerned that Kentucky was a strange and abundant place, half-mad with a restless and protean geology, secreted away under a cloak of limestone and swaying seas of timothy and bluegrass. She came to believe that the earth longed to be known. So she pressed one ear to the lip of its mouth, listening to tales that babbled up from its karsty throat.”
Henrietta is also driven in the body, an unapologetic seeker of one-night stands who knows how to reap a savage pleasure on top — always on top — of men who mean nothing to her, until she falls in love with a black groom whom she hires over her racist father’s objections, drawn by his severe beauty and the veiled mystery of his previous suffering.
Allmon Shaughnessy has learned to care for horses in a prison work program. He is the descendant of a runaway slave, Scipio, who swam the Ohio River to Cincinnati, only to commit suicide mysteriously a few years later. An antique will that Henrietta reads without comprehending alerts the reader that Scipio was born on the Forge plantation, so that Allmon and Henrietta unknowingly share family history. Allmon has a gift for horses, but it is through his own infernal deal that he lands the job of caring for the horse of Henry’s dreams, the inbred issue of a son and daughter of Secretariat: Hellsmouth, a filly, who is headed for the 2006 Kentucky Derby.
All three lineages are “poisoned.” The poison that the Forges transmit from generation to generation is the delusion of their own congenital superiority, which they shore up by misusing history and biology. “Southerners . . . know perfectly well they’re ignorant; the problem is they’re proud of it,” Henrietta tells Allmon. Being black in America may carry its own poison in the blood. We find out that All­mon’s mother, broken by poverty, developed lupus, could not afford treatment and left Allmon to fend for himself. Inevitably, the boy was swallowed up by the American correctional system. Halfway through “The Sport of Kings,” All­mon himself becomes ill. As for the horses, horse racing devotees know well that the breeding of racehorses for brilliant speed on fragile legs, great heart and the will to win at any cost is a Devil’s bargain in itself.
One curious pattern that repeats itself often in Morgan’s Southern Gothic plot is a kind of murderous tattling, in which one character tells the truth to another and mayhem results, sweeping away the guilty with the less guilty (there are no innocents). Henry’s crude and ruthless trainer, Mack Snyder, relishes informing Henry that his daughter is sleeping with the black groom, which brings about the darkest bargain in the book. (“I made a deal with the Devil!” Allmon says, once he begins to come undone.) And Reuben, “imp, raconteur, ­pissant, tricky truculent slick,” gives All­mon a four-page, crackling, cackling soliloquy of a history lesson that taunts and tempts Allmon to commit the greatest crime of all.
“The Sport of Kings” can be wearing. Some of Morgan’s black characters are so crushed by pain and misfortune one can hardly bear to read on. But I read on. There is life, wild joy and finally salvation in the language itself. C. E. Morgan has more nerve, linguistic vitality and commitment to cosmic thoroughness in one joint of her little finger than the next hundred contemporary novelists have in their entire bodies and vocabularies. Even so, I occasionally longed for the relatively simple delights of, say, Charles Portis or Annie Proulx. Despite the rich Kentucky dialects with which Morgan is clearly conversant, genuine dialogue is in short supply in “The Sport of Kings.” What the novel delivers instead is disquisition, exhortation, lessons, speechifying. Morgan never alludes to a rhetorical performance by one of her characters without inserting it whole into her text.
There were times when I glanced ahead in the book and flinched at the mighty river of words coming toward me, as muddy and heavy with organic sediment as the Ohio River, Morgan’s dominant metaphor. Once I recoiled at seeing around the bend a seven-page sermon on how “the son of God is a Negro” by Allmon’s grandfather. After I read it, however — “What part the cross don’t you understand?” — I shouted amen with the congregation. The fire, virtuosity and spiritual imagination with which Morgan conjures this weary, seen-it-all, demotic black prophet — like so much else in her book — are nothing short of genius.
