To the Editor:
Re “The Cost of Trout Fishing” (Op-Ed, April 11):
While it’s admirable that Douglas M. Thompson no longer fishes, he didn’t mention the greatest cost of trout fishing: the immense suffering and death of the victims.
Science has shown that fish feel fear and pain. Among the compelling evidence of this are the many pain receptors fish have, including in their sensitive mouths. Being impaled and hauled through the water is undoubtedly terrifying and immensely painful.
Fishing is even crueler than hunting since, instead of the intent being to instantaneously kill, fishing entails “playing” the victim: fighting with the fish. Like hunting, it is not a sport, since fish are unwilling participants.
All of the nutrients derived from fish can be obtained more humanely, healthfully and environmentally responsibly from plant sources. Needlessly harming an animal — for fun or food or any other reason — is animal abuse.
The only genuinely “ethical approach” to the many problems caused by fishing is to stop fishing and give these sentient beings the real respect and protection they deserve.
MARY FINELLI
President, Fish Feel
Silver Spring, Md.
To the Editor:
Douglas M. Thompson paints a bleak portrait of rearing, stocking and catching nonnative trout in America.
Equally sad are the tens of thousands of miles of native trout water that have been lost to ill-informed agricultural and development practices. The good news is that initiatives like the Eastern Brook Trout Joint Venture are uniting state and federal natural resource agencies and conservation groups to restore and protect America’s native brook, bull, cutthroat, and rainbow trout and salmon.
Mr. Thompson didn’t broach two other important aspects of hatchery-supported angling. Fees from licenses provide the bulk of funding for state game and fish agencies, which safeguard scores of songbirds and other nongame species. And when an adult introduces a youth to fishing, he or she is sowing a seed that just may produce the next generation of conservationists, America’s most endangered species.
JOHN ROSS
Asheville, N.C.
 
The writer is the author of “Trout Unlimited’s Guide to America’s 100 Best Trout Streams.” 
