IQALUIT, Nunavut — The boys’ soccer team from Clyde River arrived hours before the most important tournament of the year in the Canadian Arctic. At the airport, the players climbed into taxis and pickup trucks, their luggage piled like rocks on the surrounding tundra.
Seventeen teams were scheduled for the indoor territorial tournament here last weekend in one of the world’s coldest and most remote soccer hotbeds. Nine boys and nine girls would be selected to represent the northern territory of Nunavut in the under-16 division at the Arctic Winter Games in Greenland next March.
“This is their World Cup,” said Gabriel Assis, the chief referee for the Nunavut tournament.
The players from Clyde River were shy and quiet beneath their ball caps and sunglasses. If not for this summer tournament, said Martin Iqaqrialu, the coach, his players would be hunting seals, fishing for char or hanging around home above the Arctic Circle.
“It’s too expensive for some to hunt,” Iqaqrialu (pronounced ee-kha-kree-AH-loo) said of the cost of living in such a detached community. “You know how much a can of pop costs at home? Seven dollars.”
Since the school year ended in Clyde River and the gym closed, the team had been training outside on a dirt road and a concrete basketball court, Iqaqrialu said.
Lacking fancy soccer gear, the players would wear orange-and-white basketball uniforms in the Nunavut tournament. For some, this would be their first time playing on artificial turf or participating in a tournament away from home.
“It’s a once-in-a-lifetime trip,” Iqaqrialu said. “Some told me they were so excited, they hadn’t slept all night.”
For Iqaqrialu, 33, the tournament resonated as another step toward personal renewal. He had coached a girls’ team from Clyde River at the Arctic Winter Games in 2002, at age 19. It had been a proud moment for the Inuit hamlet on the northeastern coast of Baffin Island. Only two years earlier, according to a newspaper account at the time, there had been no team and only one soccer ball for the entire community of about 950 people.
“The youngest coach ever!” Iqaqrialu said, pumping his arms.
But amid the magnificent fjords and glaciers of Clyde River, where artists are celebrated for their whalebone carvings, Iqaqrialu said that by then his life had already turned to despair after a younger brother hanged himself. A stepbrother would also take his own life.
The transition for many Inuit to community living from a nomadic lifestyle has grown increasingly traumatic since the 1970s and ’80s. The suicide rate in Canada’s far north is about 10 times the national average.
For more than a dozen years, Iqaqrialu said, he sniffed propane gas, once setting a somber personal record of emptying 21 hand-held canisters in 24 hours. His teeth have been ravaged.
“I didn’t know who I was or where I was,” he said.
In 2013, Iqaqrialu, a small, thin man who favors a mustache and an Ottawa Senators cap, began to emerge from his propane haze, he said.
“I took a look at myself,” he said. “What I saw was a useless guy.”
He entered rehab in Ottawa and appeared in a documentary called “Tony, Back From the Brink.” The title referred to a friend, Tony Kalluk, who led a troubled, violent life before becoming a counselor to Iqaqrialu and others.
“Martin needs me; I know that,” Kalluk said of Iqaqrialu in the documentary. “I believe in him. Maybe that’s all he needs to make him believe in himself again.”
Iqaqrialu supervised the gym in Clyde River, but he had not coached soccer in about five years when Norman Natanine, 14, the team captain, approached him two months ago. The boys had no one to guide them, and the Nunavut territorial tournament was approaching. A chance to play in the Arctic Winter Games was on the line.
Iqaqrialu could not say no.
“I looked at his face,” he said of his captain. “It was a serious face.”
Assis, the chief referee, stood at the front desk of the Frobisher Inn, using a pair of scissors to make yellow cards and red cards from construction paper.
“Think FIFA does this for the World Cup?” he said, smiling.
There are about 600 registered soccer players in Nunavut, more than there are for hockey, and perhaps 1,000 total participants, officials said. Soccer required less expensive gear and fewer players than hockey. It helped provide a year-round activity, a sense of community, a connection to the outside world and a distraction from social problems like alcoholism, domestic violence, sexual abuse and the alarming suicide rate.
“Soccer is more than a sport,” said Kim Walton, a teacher who will coach Nunavut’s under-16 girls’ team at the 2016 Arctic Winter Games. “It can be a lifesaver for some of these kids.”
Sports, like everything in the Arctic, demand constant, patient improvisation. Nunavut makes up about 20 percent of Canada’s land mass and is more than twice the size of Texas, but it has only an estimated 36,000 inhabitants, predominantly Inuit. There are no roads connecting the 25 communities in this vast territory. Every trip requires a snowmobile, a dogsled, an all-terrain vehicle, a boat or an airplane.
Adjustments must be made for immense distance, mercurial weather, extravagant costs and geographic paradox. Soccer is best played on plush grass, but nearly all of Nunavut is tundra.
So the sport has adapted. Soccer is played mostly inside on basketball courts. Iqaluit (pronounced i-HAL-oo-it or i-KAL-oo-it) is one of only three villages in the territory with artificial turf. The selection tournament for the Arctic Winter Games would be played on a synthetic surface fitted to the floor of a hockey rink.
“Around here, you’ve got to be flexible with a capital F,” said Dawn Currie, the tournament coordinator.
June had been capricious in Iqaluit, with dense fog and lingering snow. Ice still clotted Frobisher Bay. Patches of snow clung to the tundra like sand traps on a golf course. In the early days of summer, the sky at midnight was dishwater gray with a swab of light on the horizon.
“Looks like 6 in the morning,” Assis, the referee, said as he took a photograph before the tournament.
Extreme isolation meant that available soccer gear, like food, must be bought locally at exorbitant prices (a takeout pizza can cost $29), flown in or shipped on barges that arrived in Iqaluit from late July to early October.
The artificial turf arrived four years ago by boat, cut into sections like giant welcome mats. The balls for the territorial tournament arrived in May by air from Ontario. Assis and his chief assistant referee, Lyndon Hooper, a member of the Canada’s Soccer Hall of Fame, flew up from Toronto. The medals came from Saskatchewan.
Currie, the tournament coordinator, found construction paper for yellow and red cards at a craft store. She scrambled to find whistles for the local teenage referees and carried them on her flight from Ottawa: three hockey whistles and four bright orange models designed for marine safety.
“I saw some cool ones that looked like kazoos, but I figured I’d better go with what I know,” Currie said.
The early fog began to lift in Iqaluit last Friday, but other communities remained shrouded. Half of the teams had not arrived before the scheduled opening match. “Weather will make or break this tournament,” said Joselyn Morrison, president of the Nunavut Soccer Association, a volunteer organization.
The schedule was shuffled on the fly. The Iqaluit Huskies, a local girls’ team, opened against Arctic Bay, the northernmost team, and the home side quickly established its comfort and familiarity with the turf.
The playing surface conformed to the rink here, where turf is installed from May to October, before hockey season goes into full skate. “Hockey gets the girls,” said Justin Cox, 14, a soccer player from Iqaluit who planned to leave in August for a hockey school in Banff, Alberta.
Futsal rules applied for the soccer tournament: five players on a side, no use of the hockey boards for passing. The ball was smaller than a standard soccer ball, and less bouncy. Arctic Bay tied the score before halftime, 1-1, but Iqaluit possessed more depth and skill and pulled away to win, 5-1.
Soccer has served as a bridge for the Inuit to the broader Canadian culture, and also to their forebears, who played a similar game with a ball made from seal skin, said Teresa Kolola, 13, a defender from Iqaluit.
“This is a new age for our culture,” Kolola said. “We aren’t like before, living in igloos, hunting without guns. Everything is coming to us from the big cities and has brought us into what the world is now.”
A school bus ferried the Arctic Bay players the short distance from the arena to Inuksuk High School, where they joined other visiting teams in sleeping on classroom floors during the three-day tournament.
The school had been named for traditional Inuit stone monuments used as directional markers, but the buildings were futuristic in design: squat and blue with porthole windows, suggesting an aquarium made of ice cubes.
Iqaluit is the capital of Nunavut and its largest city, with a population of about 7,500. The arresting village design evoked the polar, the lunar and the aquatic, as if the city planners had been Jack London, Stanley Kubrick and Jules Verne.
Boxy houses sat on ridges above the high school in the colors of Easter eggs, contrasting with the brown of the tundra. Below the high school, Nakasuk Elementary resembled a lunar landing module. St. Jude’s Anglican Cathedral took the shape of an igloo. At the new cemetery nearby, the lower jawbones of a bowhead whale formed an arch 20 feet high.
Sitting on the school bus, the girls from Arctic Bay were as talkative as the boys from Clyde River had been reticent. Shelaine Shooyook, 14, Arctic Bay’s top player, said she loved her first game on artificial turf. “It’s so soft when you fall,” she said.
Others from Arctic Bay said they preferred the fresh air and extra space of playing outdoors, even in winter when temperatures dip far below zero above the Arctic Circle. Outside, the players mark the boundaries of a makeshift field by scraping their feet on the snow and ice.
“Sometimes it hurts when you kick the ball,” said Nadine Kilukishak, 13, but she added, “No pain, no gain.”
The girls from Arctic Bay spoke of a folktale that the Northern Lights were spirits that could be summoned by whistling. If the whistling persisted, the spirits removed the head of an Inuit and used it to play soccer.
“They still scare me,” Macy Kalluk, 14, said, only half-jokingly, of the Northern Lights. “When I see them, I stay home.”
Regional tournaments in Nunavut are usually held in October and November. During the deep winter, teams play intramural soccer in their villages, unable to travel because of the severe cost and cold.
Walton, the Arctic Winter Games coach, said it cost about $40,000 last November for a chartered round-trip flight for her team from the tiny village of Kugaaruk, where she teaches, to the community of Kugluktuk, about two and a half hours away. The money came from the nonprofit Nunavut Soccer Association and fund-raisers like bingo games, dances, bake sales and movie nights in the school gym.
In the spring, some teams travel to a tournament in Yellowknife in the Northwest Territories, from which Nunavut separated in 1999. The Arctic Winter Games are held every other year, and they are the highest competition to which most athletes from Nunavut aspire, aside from outliers like the hockey player Jordin Tootoo of the Devils.
In recent years, Walton said, some of her players, while traveling through Yellowknife, had ridden in an elevator and encountered a parking meter for the first time.
“They thought it was crazy that you had to pay to park your car,” Walton said, adding that soccer provided experiences “that many people in their communities don’t get a chance to see.”
Occasionally, travel in Nunavut called for extreme alternative transportation. In 2011 and 2012, a soccer team from the village of Igloolik traveled about four hours over ice to Hall Beach, riding in an oversize sled called a qamutik, pulled by a snowmobile and bundled in winter gear and caribou skins.
“There’s no gas station along the way to stop and get your junk food,” said Romeyn Stevenson, the finance director of the Nunavut Soccer Association.
Finally, for the second day of the Nunavut tournament, every team had arrived. On short notice, the soccer association spent $9,000 chartering a plane for the boys’ and girls’ teams from Cape Dorset. They had been stranded at home by fog, and without scheduled weekend flights, they were in danger of missing their only opportunity in nine months to play against other villages.
“We’ve been training for two or three months,” said Mikijjuk Parr, 15, the captain of the Cape Dorset boys’ team. “I would have been sad if we couldn’t come.”
In a girls’ game, Whale Cove scored a stirring 5-4 victory over Arctic Bay, and then the team planned to see the 3-D animated movie “Inside Out.” Bobbie Shimout, 11, one of the players from Whale Cove, population 400, said she had never been inside a movie theater, much less one located in a hotel, as it was in Iqaluit.
“Do you have to pay?” she said.
Her best friend on the team, Renee Okalik, 12, said she had seen her first tree at a tournament in Yellowknife in May. It had been an eventful spring.
“I shot my first seal,” Okalik said, holding her hand to her eye to depict its size. “I’m a junior ranger.”
The girls’ semifinal between Whale Cove and Coral Harbour built to a drama that would have been riveting at any level of soccer. A scoreless game extended through overtime to penalty kicks. Shufly Nattar, 12, the goalkeeper from Whale Cove, stepped into the net. This was not her first shootout. Nor was it her first pressured moment. At 9, she shot a caribou. “In the neck,” Nattar said.
But Amauyak Angootealuk, 13, the keeper from Coral Harbour, was also equal to the moment. She saved two penalty kicks, and took a decisive kick of her own that deflected off Nattar’s right hand into the net. Coral Harbour prevailed by 4-3 in the shootout, and players leapt over the hockey boards to swamp Angootealuk in celebration.
Mavis Ell, the Coral Harbour coach, patted her heart. “I was so nervous,” she said. “I’ve never watched a shootout.”
Her team had arrived the night before the tournament, after a five-hour delay. Some players had forgotten to bring air mattresses or sleeping pads, so they rustled up mats from the gym at Inuksuk High. Many had never played on artificial turf.
“I told my players the turf field is three times bigger than our gym,” Ell said. “So they cannot stop running.”
They did not, defeating Iqaluit by 4-0 in the championship match. In six games, Coral Harbour scored 20 goals and conceded only three. It was a remarkable achievement given that Ell, 20, a college student, had coached the team for only three weeks and had needed the futsal rules explained to her by her players.
“We ran the practices; we didn’t want to be too hard on her because it’s her first time,” said Christa Emiktowt, 14, Coral Harbour’s star player, adding that Ell was “not too hard, not too soft — perfect.”
Her own experience as a player, Ell said, made her realize how difficult it could be to find willing coaches in remote Arctic communities. “If I didn’t come, they wouldn’t have come,” Ell said of her players.
In the boys’ bracket, Clyde River won its opening match, 4-2, playing with speed and muscularity. The team advanced to the semifinals and then lost, 3-0, to Rankin Inlet, the eventual champion. In the dressing room, Jenna Palituq, a college student, congratulated the players and Iqaqrialu, the coach.
“He’s helped out a lot,” Palituq said. “Most of the time, we don’t have anybody to attend the tournaments. Finally, we’ve got someone to represent the community.”
The roster for the Arctic Winter Games was announced. Two of Clyde River’s players were selected. They joined the others to take passport photos. Iqaqrialu became choked up with gratitude.
“My dream came true,” he said.
Ole Gjerstad, a filmmaker who consulted on the documentary in which Iqaqrialu appeared, said in an email that the coach “showed commitment,” and was lucky, in going to rehab.
“It was either that or a steep slide to the end of his life,” Gjerstad wrote. “When you sniff 21 canisters of propane in one day. …”
As Iqaqrialu prepared to fly back to Clyde River, he filled his backpack with ginger ale, expensive but cheaper in Iqaluit than at home. He planned to spend part of the summer kayaking with distressed youths, assuring them that there were alternatives to destroying themselves.
“I’m trying to show the community that you can turn your life around,” Iqaqrialu said. “I’m proud of my team. I’m proud of myself.”
