“Here you go, try this,” an attendant at Stella Maris Bait and Tackle in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, said on a recent Sunday afternoon, after learning that a novice angler would soon embark on a half-day fluke-fishing trip aboard the Ranger VI, a party boat docked nearby. He handed over a Stella Maris custom rig with a bushy chartreuse lure.
Stella Maris, at 2702 Emmons Avenue, has served the local fishing community since 1947, catering to amateur and professional fishers alike, and to the boats, like the Ranger VI, that line the pier. The name is Latin for Star of the Sea, an ancient name for the Virgin Mary, patron saint of the sea. A statue stands in a glass case at the rear of the shop, overlooking an ice chest of frozen bunker and a bucket of live clams.
By 1:30 p.m., the Ranger VI was idling in the Coney Island Flats, with sunbathers, the Cyclone and the Wonder Wheel all visible in the distance. As sea gulls swooped, Spyder, a deckhand, stood at the starboard bow and taught 20 or so newbies how to bait a hook.
“Your best way: In one eye and out the other,” he said, holding in his meaty hand a tiny three-inch-long bait fish. “Just let it hang,” he said, releasing the line. “Every once in while, bounce the sinker off the floor.”
Everything Spyder used — every piece of bait and tackle on the vessel, including the reels, poles, hooks, lines and 10-ounce lead sinkers — had come from Stella Maris.
It has been this way for as long as John Lind, an old salt on the Ranger VI, can remember. A captain now for 38 years, he started out as a deckhand, when he was 12. For more than four decades, he’s been a Stella Maris customer.
Sheepshead Bay has changed, he said, and so have the people who fish there. Across from the pier, where condos and an Applebee’s stand, were vacant lots, which would fill up with visitors out for a day of pleasure fishing.
“The fleet used to be 40 boats strong,” Mr. Lind, 57, said. “Now it’s down to 10 or 12.”
What hasn’t changed is Stella Maris.
“Look at the building,” Mr. Lind said. “It’s like it was when I was a kid.”
On the facade, faded aqua marquee-style letters spell out the store’s name, flanked by two old Coca-Cola signs bleached by the sun. On the rooftop, from a pole wrapped in Christmas lights, a tattered American flag rippled in the breeze.
Inside, nearly every surface was stocked with gear and supplies, including fishing poles, filet knives, tackle boxes, traps, nets, burlap sacks, sunglasses and Stella Maris T-shirts (Bill Murray wore one in the film “St. Vincent.”) At the counter, a worker with a shark and an octopus tattooed on one arm and an anchor tattooed on the other hand-plucked from a tangled clump of sea grass a half-dozen wriggling, red-bristled sand worms: bait for bottom feeders.
Six brothers — Mike, Salvatore, Anthony, Tony, Neal and Joseph Lauro — started Stella Maris nearly 70 years ago. (Yes, Anthony and Tony.) The last of the brothers, Neal, died in 2011, at 86. Today, the shop is run by his grandnephew. Salvatore’s son, Thomas Lauro, 66, a lawyer in Staten Island, manages the property.
“If they don’t have it, you don’t need it,” Captain Lind said.
With her Stella Maris rig, the novice angler caught (and released) two fish. She’d like to believe this miracle was occasioned by the store’s patron saint.
