BANGKOK — Surawut Maharom was looking stressed. His job had seemed simple when he had first arrived: to oversee an election on Thursday to choose a new president of the Football Association of Thailand.
But nothing is simple when it comes to soccer in Thailand.
“This is a civil war,” Surawut said. “It’s the most difficult case that I’ve dealt with.”
In October, FIFA, global soccer’s governing body, dismissed the executive committee of the Thai soccer association after its president, Worawi Makudi, was suspended pending an ethics investigation. FIFA called on Surawut, a respected administrator in Thai sports, to lead a committee that would temporarily take charge and oversee the election of a new leader.
In an unusual turn, Pinit Sasinin, the secretary of the committee, drafted the electoral rules before resigning and announcing that he would run for president.
The election may not go ahead at all if one of the two front-runners gets his way. And even if it does, it is unlikely that the fighting will stop.
While most of the attention in world soccer has been on the sometimes chaotic race to replace Sepp Blatter as president of FIFA, the election in Thailand seems even more disorderly.
The intrigue of the Thai election is a microcosm of how soccer is governed in many countries: a messy process filled with fights over local control. As in the FIFA race, the ousted leader looms large in the Thai election, and Worawi will cast a shadow even after new leadership is picked.
But if the election can be a first step to healing and cleaning up Thai soccer, then perhaps all hope is not lost for larger scandal-hit organizations like FIFA.
Six candidates are running, but “there are two real candidates,” said Charnwit Phalajivin, one of those two. “One group has a lot of powerful people backing them, and the other group has a lot of powerful people behind them.”
Charnwit, who coached the Thai national team from 2005 to 2008, has support from much of the national soccer association; from Muangthong United, one of the leading clubs in Thai soccer; and from Siam Sports, the country’s largest sports media group.
The other front-runner, Somyot Poompanmoung, was the chief of the Thai police from 2014 until he retired in September. Most fans seem to support Somyot, as do influential political figures like Newin Chidchob, owner of the Thai champion Buriram United. The government has tried to keep its support of Somyot quiet, fearing that FIFA could impose a punishment if there is open political interference.
Although Somyot is a former police chief appointed by the military junta, he is seen as the candidate of reform because Charnwit worked for Worawi for years.
Both candidates agree that more transparency is needed in Thai soccer. Somyot wants the Thai Premier League to use England’s Premier League as a model, with top clubs involved in decision making. Charnwit is calling for a more open version of what already exists, citing improvement in recent years at both the club and international levels as evidence of progress.
Charnwit said that he had the soccer credentials needed for the job, unlike Somyot, who had “just recently become a football person.” Charnwit also said he could better reconcile the two factions.
Worawi, who was first elected president in 2007 after years as general secretary, was given a 90-day suspension in October that was extended in January. The punishment came three months after a Thai court gave Worawi a suspended jail sentence for falsifying documents in the association’s 2013 presidential election.
Worawi was already a controversial and unpopular figure for many fans, with claims that he had repeatedly profited from the development of Thai soccer. In 2011, the chairman of England’s Football Association said Worawi had asked for television rights for a friendly between Thailand and England in exchange for his support for England’s bid for the 2018 World Cup, which was awarded to Russia.
Charnwit has been called a proxy for his former boss, accusations that were renewed after a recent meeting between the two was caught on camera.
“Everyone knows Charnwit and Worawi are together,” Somyot said.
Charnwit acknowledged that his former boss had suggested that he run.
“Worawi is a colleague and old friend,” he said, adding that Worawi could even take an advisory role in his administration. “There have been some good things in the past, but people didn’t talk about it much. People have focused on the bad things. I will fix those kind of small things that people are concerned about.”
Not all would say they are small. For Somyot, the main problem under Worawi was financial.
“They can’t answer questions about earnings and expenses, and when they do, it is not correct,” Somyot said, citing a sold-out 2014 match in Bangkok between Thailand and Malaysia.
“There were 40 to 50,000 people, and tickets were from 100 to 500 baht,” or about $2.80 to $14, Somyot said. “When the F.A. declared to the public the money collected from that match, it was only 40,600 baht. Where is the money? This is just one example.”
Narinpong Jinapak, the lawyer for the Football Association of Thailand, who has been Worawi’s spokesman during the campaign, said: “We have looked into that, and that was the accountant filling in the wrong budget. It is very technical. If we see something illegal in taxation, then we have to look into it, but so far, there is nothing.”
Heading into Thursday’s election, a major topic of discussion has been a change in 30 voters that Charnwit’s supporters say warrants a postponement of the election.
In total, there will be 72 voters: 36 from clubs in the top two divisions, six from representatives of smaller competitions and 30 from clubs in regional leagues.
The 30 voters were first picked in September, when Worawi was still in charge and looking toward another term. On Jan. 22, after Worawi’s suspension, new elections were held, and only two of those 30 clubs retained their votes.
A week later, two clubs that lost their votes sued. Charnwit’s supporters hoped that lawsuit would cause a postponement, but that has not happened.
“If we had the previous 30 votes, I think I would have a good chance,” Charnwit said, “but now we have the new 30 votes; the other side has a good chance. It’s clear that the new 30 votes side with that team.”
Somyot said he was prepared for anything. “They will do everything to stop the election,” he said. “They don’t want it to happen. They have to have this war as they are losing their powers. But the fans are bored. They are really bored.”
