Name: Jack Carlson
Age: 30
Hometown: Belmont, Mass.
Now Lives: A one-bedroom apartment in Battery Park City with Keziah Beall, his girlfriend and business partner.
Claim to Fame: Mr. Carlson is a former member of the United States national rowing team and the entrepreneur behind a budding rowing brand — first with a coffee-table book, “Rowing Blazers,” which chronicles the esoteric history of the colorful blazers worn by elite rowing clubs, and now with an upscale fashion label of the same name.
Big Break: In 2010, as a doctoral student in archaeology at Oxford University, Mr. Carlson set out to publish an illustrated volume on the zany jackets worn for centuries by rowers. He didn’t know any publishers or agents, but he did have a network of rowing friends who were willing to model, including Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss, who rowed for Harvard University.
“It’s a pretty close-knit community,” he said. “Rowers, in general, are willing to help each other out.” He pitched the book to three publishers. Every one of them was interested, including Vendome, the publisher of art and illustrated books, which released the book in 2014. Another rowing friend introduced him to an executive at Ralph Lauren, which hosted parties for the book in London and New York.
Latest Project: In May, with the knowledge he accumulated for the book, Mr. Carlson started a clothing line called Rowing Blazers. The blazers, which sell for $550 to $1,095, were designed with academic rigor and inspired by his vintage collection. In a nod to a Dutch tradition, for example, some of the blazers have Latin phrases, like “forsan et haec,” stitched under the lapel. “If the manufacturer says that’s really not possible, those are the kind of moments I love the most, because it means probably no one else is doing it this way,” he said.
Next Thing: Mr. Carlson is collaborating with Merz b. Schwanen, a German knitwear brand, on a collection of T-shirts and sweatshirts. The collection is to be released in a pop-up shop on Rivington Street in October. He is also designing a collection of blazers to benefit Row New York, a nonprofit that teaches rowing to underserved students.
The Classics: Despite all his extracurricular activities, Mr. Carlson was able to his complete his doctoral thesis, “Images, Objects and Imperial Power in the Roman and Qin-Han Empires,” in 2015. He now hopes to turn the thesis into a book, making an esoteric topic more accessible, as he has done with rowing blazers.
