Sullivan County — located two hours northwest of Manhattan in the Upper Delaware Valley of the Catskill Mountains — has long been a source of bounty for the city. In the 1800s, its surrounding bluestone rock was used to create many of N.Y.C.’s sidewalks, and its farms and dairies now supply many of the city’s best restaurants with organic vegetables and cheeses. Unlike more densely settled, gentrified areas outside the city, such as the Hudson River Valley or the Hamptons, this corner of the state feels lost in time, a cluster of tiny two-block hamlets that follow the twists of the Delaware River. Famous for its fly-fishing, it was once home to a number of 19th-century outdoors clubs (some of which still exist today) on the Beaverkill, a trout-stocked tributary of the Delaware. Later, an absence of trains linking Sullivan County to Manhattan, along with a lack of sophisticated hotels and restaurants, preserved the area’s untrammeled remoteness, leaving it largely underdeveloped and undervisited.
But that is changing. On the western side of the county, three adjacent towns — Narrowsburg, Livingston Manor and Callicoon (each less than 20 miles from one another) — are being transformed, thanks to entrepreneurial locals and city transplants. A few chic hotels, the area’s first, have arrived, and more shops and restaurants are opening — and cross-pollinating — on the sleepy main streets. But the development remains modest and small-scale — which means the mosaicked forests of sugar maple and yellow birch, gently rolling fields of wildflowers and thriving population of bald eagles still remain at the heart of Sullivan County.
The DeBruce
Sims and Kirsten Foster have cornered the hotel market in Sullivan County: There’s the woodsy Arnold House; the gourmand-favorite North Branch Inn; and the quaint Nine River Road. The 14-room DeBruce, their most polished project yet, features nine-course dinners in a beechwood-paneled dining room with panoramic views of the Catskills. N.Y.C. chef Aksel Theilkuhl, a Laurent Tourondel disciple, forages nearly everything on the menu from the 600-acre property, including fiddlehead ferns, root vegetables and Black Angus beef from the cows in the pasture next door.
Henning’s Local
At this relaxed Scandinavian-influenced restaurant — housed in an antiques-filled space above an 1800s general store — you can have fresh-from-the-Beaverkill hatchery rainbow trout prepared in a number of ways, including ‘‘Norwegianne,’’ with sour cream, chives and potatoes.
The Kaatskeller
In 2010, Jon Westergreen, former head of the county’s chamber of commerce, opened Main Street Farm, a gourmet cafe selling local produce. In July, he debuted an outdoor pizza joint with picnic-bench seating. The outdoor wood-fired oven turns out Catskill-inspired pies (broccoli shoots and local chèvre) and above the kitchen, there’s a bar designed by Westergreen’s partner, Christopher Tierney, of the Manhattan speakeasy Apotheke.
Callicoon Farmers’ Market
Callicoon hosts one of the best weekly farmers’ markets in Sullivan County: Look for mozzarella with Sicilian sea salt and freshly bottled cow’s milk from Tonjes Dairy; wood-smoked trout from Heller’s Farm; and crisp alcoholic cider from Aaron Burr Cidery.
Catskill Fly-Fishing Center and Museum
You’ll find plenty of evidence of Sullivan County’s long fly-fishing history at these country-style houses dedicated to the sport and its key figures. America’s last bamboo rod-making community workshop is also held here, and a few times a year you can learn how to make an old-fashioned rod from scratch.
The Emerald Ballroom
The Heron, a popular riverside bistro in Narrowsburg, was the first great restaurant to open in the area in 2012. Maintaining a rigorously local farm-to-table ethos, it serves unpretentious dishes like house-made liver pâtés and crispy fried buttermilk chicken. Now its basement space hosts a new live music venue, with an original tin ceiling, inventive cocktails (Fernet and Coke) and homegrown rock band performances.
Sunny’s Callicoon Pop 
Sunrise Ruffalo and her husband, the actor Mark Ruffalo, left L.A. in the ’90s to live in the county part-time. This summer, she opened an eclectic shop in the village with clothing and home goods from near and far, like soap from the local Buck Brook Alpacas farm and New Orleans artist Chris ­Roberts-Antieaus’s framed tapestries. 21 Lower Main Street, Callicoon, N.Y., 12723, (845) 887-3175.
MayerWasner
Pamela Mayer’s understated shop, founded in 2006, was one of the pioneering boutiques in Narrowsburg. A former clothing designer in New York City, Mayer has assembled a bohemian selection including tie-dye dresses from Raquel Allegra, straw hats from Tuscany and organic skin-care lines, including those from Witchey Handmade, owned by Callicoon local Hollie Witchey, a model, herbalist and homeopath.
Nest
Created by a former W and Vogue editor who moved to Narrowsburg in 2006, the boutique, which now has a sister shop in Livingston Manor, offers hints of mountain charm, like antique snowshoes and Native American blankets. There’s also batik bedding from India, colorful saris and leather and woven cotton satchels that resemble a traditional creel — a portable wicker basket fly-fisherman once used to store their catch.
