KINVARA, Ireland —  Thirty men battle on a deep-green field, each one wielding what looks like a field hockey stick moonlighting as a broken oar. They chase a ball that fits snug in the hand, sometimes balancing it on their sticks as they run, sometimes swinging the sticks in midsprint to arc the ball toward a goal’s uprights.
Bursts of “Come on, lads!” erupt from the sidelines, along with an epithet or two, as the players bump shoulders, jab their sticks of ash and do everything allowed to dispossess their opponents of the ball. These efforts, on occasion, draw blood.
The workday is over, the evening sun is tumbling from the fish-gray clouds, and a team from Connemara has traveled across Galway to play this match on a pitch in Kinvara. To play hurling, a game as rooted here as the bone-white limestone chalking the nearby hills.
The sport might be likened to a mash-up of lacrosse, field hockey and baseball, but even the most strained analogy “only gets you so far,” said Paul Rouse, a professor at University College Dublin who specializes in the history of sport.
“It’s a game that combines skills that are not present in other games,” Rouse said.
In truth, hurling is a game all its own, at the highest levels a joyous and ferocious ballet, danced on grass.
Tonight’s two teams are at the lower ranks of Ireland’s hurling structure. Even so, the players from Connemara, in white and blue, and the players from Kinvara, in purple and gold, catch, balance and drive the ball so effortlessly that man and ash can seem as one.
“We’ve got everyone from students to tradesmen playing tonight,” says Joe Byrne, a onetime Kinvara hurler and former chairman of the Galway Hurling Board. “We’ve a carpenter, a builder, a teacher, an accountant. There’s an actuary and a mechanical engineer. They’re a representation of our community.”
Generations have aspired to move up from local clubs like these to play for their county’s senior team and vie for the All-Ireland championship — an event that captivates the country, even though hurling is more prominent in some areas than in others. The entire sport, from this match in a rural field to the intercounty final at Croke Park in Dublin, is an amateur endeavor.
The evening’s game is part of the Cruinniu na mBad, Irish for “gathering of the boats,” an annual celebration of the distinctive wooden sailing vessels called Galway hookers. The winning team will claim possession of a glistening silver cup and celebrate at the Pier Head Bar & Restaurant, down by the bay.
But this match is no “friendly.” No hurling match is. Players as young as 17, and as old as the body can stand, swing their clubs for pleasure and for their small cut of Ireland. Here in County Galway, this could be Abbeyknockmoy or Moycullen, Ballinderreen or Clarinbridge, Athenry or Tuam.
Tonight: Inverin of Connemara against Kinvara, on a windy pitch that locals created from a field of thorn and stone more than a half-century ago. Older people in town recall being dispatched as schoolchildren to pick up the rocks.
How much is at stake was reflected before the start of the match, when the players clattered in their cleats into a simple concrete building, Connemara in this room, Kinvara in that room, for pregame pep talks. On the Connemara side, players sat with hurleys in hand as their wiry manager, a school psychologist named Rory O Bearra, encouraged them in the language of Irish.
Mark your men, lads! Catch the ball — ball to hand! Move the ball quickly. Short grip on the hurley. Hit the man or hit the space with the ball. Let’s go, lads, let’s go!
Then out they headed to a verdant battlefield, where the men from Kinvara were waiting.
Amateur Stardom
One of the best Galway hurlers ever was Gerry McInerney, who, as a boy in Kinvara, practiced his swing while tending cows. A nationally prominent player in the 1980s and early ’90s, he was known for his fierce defense, distinctive mullet and white cleats — a rebellious fashion statement within the staid Gaelic Athletic Association, the cultural organization that oversees Irish sports.
“I got a few whacks, but nothing too bad,” McInerney says. “You’d get a few staples, or some glue, and you’d be back in.”
While working construction in New York for several years, he commuted to Ireland to play hurling, helping Galway win consecutive All-Ireland championships, in 1987 and 1988. Then back to the States, back to anonymous manual labor. The glamorous life of an amateur sportsman, compensated only with expenses — though, he says, “You might get a couple of pints.”
McInerney is now the owner of a sporting-goods shop in nearby Oranmore. Asked how he tried to explain hurling to Americans while living in the States, he replies, “I didn’t.”
A wise decision, perhaps. In hurling, there are 15 players to a side, 35-minute halves, “blood” substitutions — exactly what it sounds like — and an ancient purpose: advance the ball to the goal.
This requires hitting the ball with the hurley, often while on the run, between the uprights and over the crossbar, for 1 point, or under the crossbar, past a goalkeeper and into the net, for 3 points. What happens in that pursuit is a fearless athleticism of stops and starts, feints and sprints, bangs and bruises, all with the wide-ended hurley stick used to balance, swing and block.
“I can’t think of another game where somebody puts their hand in the air to catch a ball — while other men are swinging three feet of timber all around them — and successfully achieving it,” Rouse said.
There is no protective padding. Helmets became mandatory only a few years ago. And the absence of any distinctive names or numbers on jerseys underscores an ethos of selflessness. A man’s number reflects the position he plays — 1 for goalkeeper, 3 for fullback, 14 for full forward — in service to his club, his parish, his county.
More Than a Game
Blurs of men continue their hurley battle for a ball skittering across a Kinvara field. The cool August air fills with the thwacks of ash, the grunts of amateurs and the English-Irish exhortations to “Come on, lads, come on!”
The Connemara team, from the Micheal Breathnach club in Inverin (named after an early-20th-century Irish writer, in keeping with this country’s celebration of the word), is of a slightly higher ranking than Kinvara’s, and its players are in better shape. Still, Kinvara — which also fields a team at a higher level — keeps pace for the first half, its players taking their swings to send the ball toward, and occasionally over, the uprights.
Kinvara’s burly, black-haired goalkeeper, a production manager named Ollie Bergin, is doing his best to thwart the Connemara attack. At 40, he is the oldest man on the pitch, save for the referee, and he minds the net these days because “my legs are gone a little bit now” — though he still loves the whack and clash.
“Well done, Ollie,” his manager, a house painter named John Linnane, shouts after a defensive play by Bergin. But his attention quickly turns to other players.
“Get rid of it!” he shouts. “Get rid of it!”
O Bearra, the Connemara manager, is doing the same, sometimes in Irish, sometimes in English. “Be ready, Darragh!” he shouts. “Good lad!”
The game they play beats in the Irish pulse. The National Museum of Ireland has an exhibit of hurling balls packed with cow hair and covered with pleated horsehair. Preserved in the dark peat of time-stopping bogs, the balls have been determined to be as much as 800 years old.
But hurling reaches back to a much earlier time, notably in stories of Cu Chulainn, Ireland’s mythological hero. He was said to have defeated a team of 150 boys single-handedly. He supposedly killed an attacking hound by driving a ball down its throat. Legend has it that he could fling the ball long distances, then throw his hurley to smack it in midair, driving the ball even further.
Through centuries of strife and English occupation, this Irish game somehow survived. In the Middle Ages, for example, English law banned adoption of various Irish customs, including hurling, “from which great evils and maims have arisen.”
For a while, the game enchanted the gentry, with landlords fielding teams to play other estates. But they gradually distanced themselves from the game, either having concluded that such Irish pursuits were beneath them or suspecting that hurling smacked of rebellious nationalism.
The game’s hold had loosened by the mid-19th century. The Roman Catholic clergy disapproved. The police distrusted large gatherings. Some areas used matches to settle scores. And the wholesale death and emigration caused by the Great Hunger, the potato famine, darkened everyday life in places like Kinvara.
But in the early 1880s, Michael Cusack, a passionate and peculiar schoolteacher from Carron in County Clare — his childhood home is now a museum, not 15 miles from here — began championing Irish customs, at a time when English games, especially cricket, were growing in popularity. His crusade coincided with a renewed push by Irish nationalists for home rule.
Cusack saw hurling as something almost beyond sports, and he wrote about it with unbridled reverie.
“A hurling match is like a city on fire, where the crackling of burning timber and the hissing of the flames swell into the roar of conflagration,” he once wrote. “We never heard sweeter music than that of the hurling field.”
He and others soon established the Gaelic Athletic Association, which provided a nationwide structure for Irish sports based on parishes and territorial boundaries, all with an implicit rejection of English ways. The G.A.A. model created days of pleasure and competition to look forward to, but it also nurtured a sense of self-worth — a pride in place — among local communities.
The game survived, and even thrived, in the destiny-determining decades that followed, through the audacious acts of rebellion, the Irish War of Independence, the civil war. Even the partitioning of Ireland did not stem hurling’s popularity among Irish nationalists living in the six counties that remain a part of the United Kingdom.
“There is a genuine local rivalry in hurling,” said Rouse, the sports historian. “True, there are extreme examples where it extends to bitterness and violence, and occasionally, there are inherited fights. Usually, it is a positive rivalry, which involves doing everything you can to beat your neighbor.
“Whatever it takes, within boundaries,” he said. “But afterward, you can still drink a pint with them.”
A Struggle Unites
The sun approaches its Galway Bay immersion. The hills of the Burren, an otherworldly landscape of limestone and flora, brood in the distance. The air hints of the sea. And the men of Connemara and Kinvara do battle in the spirit of Cu Chulainn.
Connemara has pulled far ahead, thanks in part to two balls driven under the crossbar and into the net. But Kinvara, which won the tournament cup last year, battles on, trying to live up to the halftime challenge posed by its managers in the locker room.
You know yourselves they’re going to stay strong! You’re playing lovely hurley! You don’t want to give away the cup! Let’s go lads!
Through the second half, Kinvara does its best, reaching high for the ball, then arcing it into the half-light in hope of some magical spark to power its players’ legs and lengthen their drives. But the spark does not come; in its stead, frustration.
A splintered hurley, a couple of calls for a trainer, a few shoulder bumps, and then several scrums that seem incidental to the ball. The referee calls the lopsided game a couple of minutes early, a decision that takes some by surprise.
When asked about it, he utters an obscenity understood in English or Irish. But it is a smart call. Best to leave on terms in which battered hands can grasp one another and shake.
In a couple of weeks, both teams will root together for their county, Galway, as it fights the hurling powerhouse of County Kilkenny for the All-Ireland championship in Dublin. They will cheer for neighbors, including 18-year-old Conor Whelan, who was on this very grass the night before, practicing and practicing his hurley moves, alone.
But tonight, they leave the Kinvara pitch together, driving down the famine-haunted main street, past thorn and stone, pub and shop. To the Pier Head, where the Connemara men sing songs in their native Irish, and sip from their silver cup.
