Who would win a fight between a mixed martial artist in his prime and an aging boxer who was the best of his generation? That’s a great debate for the barroom.
But what about the newsroom?
On Saturday night in Las Vegas, after two years of coarse courtship, Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Conor McGregor will compete in a boxing match, with the bizarre and the surreal on the undercard. The Times will be in on the fun — with some reservations.
A former plumber’s apprentice from Dublin, Mr. McGregor is the brash face of the Ultimate Fighting Championship, an ascendant brand in combat sports. Mr. Mayweather, 40, is a former champion in five divisions and is undefeated in 49 fights dating back to 1996. As a professional, no boxer has ever beat him. This weekend, millions are expected to watch a U.F.C. fighter try.
If the fight sounds like a stunt, well, many would agree.
“This matchup — two bombastic figures in their respective sports wed in the oddest of spectacles — certainly had the air of a carnival right from the start,” Randy Archibold, the deputy sports editor, said of The Times’s decision to send two writers and a photographer to cover the fight. “We wanted to cover it as a talked-about sporting, cultural and business event,” without getting caught up in the hype, he said.
That hype can’t be overstated. Professional sports cannot be considered separately from money and marketing, but at Saturday’s extravaganza — which has been branded the “Money Fight” — at T-Mobile Arena, the real scorecard might be the amount of revenue generated. (Each side could come away with $100 million.)
“I would say we are not above acknowledging and covering the absurdity of sport and sporting figures and the conversation about such things on social media,” Mr. Archibold said. “In terms of an actual competition, it’s hard to remember something on par with Mayweather-McGregor, at least in recent times.”
To call the flamboyant Irishman an underdog would be an understatement. Mr. McGregor is 11 years younger and has certainly proven he can land a punch, but he has never competed professionally in boxing (and two of his most powerful tools, kicking and grappling, are off-limits, of course). In a front-page Times article on Friday, the Association of Ringside Physicians, a group of doctors, expressed concern for McGregor’s safety and surprise that the competition was sanctioned.
There is no belt or title at stake, and any result could lack meaning. An upset could be followed by accusations of pageantry, flagged as just a setup for an equally lucrative rematch.
John Eligon, a former sports reporter and current national correspondent, will be in Las Vegas on Saturday. “In some ways, you kind of feel guilty going out there,” he said. “There are a dozen other boxers I’d rather see Mayweather fight, and there are a dozen M.M.A. fighters I’d rather see McGregor fight.
“But as journalists, it is our job to cover what garners public interest,” Mr. Eligon said. (Read his article on the racial dynamics of the fight here.)
To satisfy that interest, The Times will have a live story on digital platforms, with round-by-round analysis in real time. It will be a good landing point for casual fans looking for updates, said Sam Manchester, also a deputy on the sports desk.
“It’s a challenge for news organizations to figure out to what degree this is a sporting event and to what degree this is an entertainment and marketing event,” said Kevin Draper, a sports business reporter for The Times. “It reminds me of when Michael Johnson and Donovan Bailey did their 150-meter race.”
That race, on June 1, 1997, was the culmination of the trash talk and speculation that followed the 1996 Summer Olympics, where Johnson won gold in the 200 meters and Bailey in the 100 meters. A fun debate around which sprinter deserved the title of “world’s fastest man” grew into a telecast.
Bailey won easily after Johnson pulled up limp, and a sub-headline on the front page of The Times’s sports section the following day said it all — “World’s Fastest Man: Hype, Then Disappointment.”
