When teams from 39 nations were to convene in London on Saturday for the world ultimate championships, the scene quite likely looked like many other international sports competitions. There would be 3,000 athletes competing in men’s, women’s and mixed divisions. There would be flags and an opening ceremony.
But one key element of a major sporting event would be missing: referees.
Players of ultimate, popularly known as ultimate Frisbee, pride themselves on being a little different from athletes in other sports. That mentality is embodied in a concept referred to as the spirit of the game.
“Ultimate relies upon a spirit of sportsmanship that places the responsibility for fair play on the player,” the rules state prominently. “Highly competitive play is encouraged, but never at the expense of mutual respect among competitors, adherence to the agreed upon rules, or the basic joy of play.”
The spirit of the game is embodied most prominently in the sport’s lack of referees. In most ultimate competitions, players make their own calls.
But as the sport grows — it was formally recognized last year by the International Olympic Committee and could one day be an Olympic sport — there has been tension between the increasing professionalism and the freewheeling ethos on which the sport was founded.
Ultimate was developed in the late 1960s at Columbia High School in Maplewood, N.J. The original rules allowed for a referee, but early games seldom, if ever, had one. The first world championship was held in 1983 in Goteborg, Sweden, and that event is now held every four years.
The rules of the game are simple. Teams of seven try to pass the disc up the field; running with it is not allowed. A team that makes it into the end zone gets a point. Fouls can occur when there is physical contact or an improper pick or screen.
For many years, the players decided if they had been fouled. But as the sport became more competitive, players were accused of taking advantage of the system. Extended disputes threatened to spoil the game for spectators and television audiences, so a debate about adding officials began.
Many big tournaments, including the world championships, have found a middle ground: They use an official known as an observer or adviser, who acts more like a mediator than a judge or executioner.
The observers are not empowered to make calls on their own, as a referee would. Rather, they can mediate if two teams cannot come to an agreement.
“Maybe two players are going up to catch a disc, and the offensive player feels they were fouled, while the defender feels they kept their proper distance,” said Nob Rauch, the president of the World Flying Disc Federation, which runs the world championships. “The observer makes sure the players advance to a quick conclusion. It’s a way to keep the game on track.”
Tom Crawford, the chief executive of U.S.A. Ultimate, which runs the sport in the United States, said that self-policing could remain a big part of the game.
“One of the things the I.O.C. found intriguing about ultimate is that it kind of embodies the Olympic ideal,” he said. “The athletes treat each other with dignity and respect. It’s a really unique ethos. It is baked into the sport; the I.O.C. saw that right away.”
Opponents of adding full-fledged referees also contend that the players are simply best equipped to make the calls. Athletes take an online test to make sure that they know the rules.
“The athletes know exactly what’s going on,” Rauch said. “You know when a guy is taking a fall or feigning injury. We want to give the responsibility for calling the game to the athletes.”
Indeed, the observer or adviser is far from universal in ultimate. Players still make their own calls in a vast majority of friendly, high school and college games.
Two American men’s semiprofessional leagues, which are not under the U.S.A. Ultimate umbrella, have gone in the other direction and use full-fledged referees.
“Once you move the sport from being player-focused to being fan-focused, referees are able to facilitate the game and make sure it operates at the best pace and the best spirit of fairness,” said Nic Darling, executive vice president of Major League Ultimate, an eight-team men’s league playing in its fourth season.
“We wanted to focus our players on playing, and not playing two roles,” Darling said, adding, “It’s very difficult to make a call accurately when you’re trying to fend off a defender.”
Tim DeByl, the marketing manager of the American Ultimate Disc League, a 26-team league playing in its fifth season, said fan friendliness and communication were important reasons to have referees. Without officials, DeByl said, “sometimes a call between two players happens quickly, and you don’t know what’s going on.”
He added, “Games occasionally fall apart; there are some bad calls by players, and that’s a bad fan experience.”
DeByl, a longtime player, said he did not enjoy watching ultimate as much without referees.
Officials of both leagues said that maintaining the spirit of the game was important to them.
Other top American ultimate officials have declined to endorse the referee model, though.
“We believe it’s unnecessary, and they’re missing a big marketing opportunity” to promote ultimate’s unusual culture, said Rauch, of the World Flying Disc Federation.
Crawford, of U.S.A. Ultimate, said that having a referee “changes the spirit of the game” and that the absence of referees “is one of the things that is appealing to the young people being drawn to the game.”
U.S.A. Ultimate gathered players from around the country for the world championship teams, much as Olympic or World Cup teams are selected. The teams have been together for about six months, though the players have had to fit in practice times with their full-time jobs. The United States is the defending men’s champion; Japan and Canada hold the titles in the women’s and mixed events.
The finals will be shown June 25 on the CBS Sports Network. Organizers hope the observers will actually be part of the appeal. Observers will wear microphones, and the back and forth between players and the observers’ intercessions could be part of the show.
