The Rev. John Lo Schiavo, who spent 14 years as president of the University of San Francisco, notably making headlines when he took the rare step of suspending the men’s basketball program after repeated violations of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules, died on Friday in Los Gatos, Calif. He was 90.
The death was confirmed in an email by a spokeswoman for the university, Anne-Marie Devine Tasto, who said Father Lo Schiavo had dementia. 
Father Lo Schiavo, a San Francisco native, was affiliated with the university, a Jesuit school, almost continuously for more than 60 years. He started as a philosophy instructor in 1950 and was later dean of students, vice president for student affairs, chairman of the board of trustees and rector of the university Jesuit community. A popular campus figure who was known as Father Lo, he was president from 1977 to 1991.
Nationally, Father Lo Schiavo is best known for his decision in 1982 to forgo the revenue, publicity and acclaim of the university’s successful men’s basketball program and instead stand up for institutional rectitude. His suspension of the program indefinitely was considered the first time a university had shut down a major sports program, without external pressure to do so, because of N.C.A.A. rules violations, some of which preceded his tenure.
Once a national power, the University of San Francisco Dons won 60 consecutive games from 1954 to 1956 and two national championships. Players included Bill Russell and K. C. Jones, who starred together in the National Basketball Association with the great Boston Celtics teams of the late 1950s and 1960s. 
In the 1970s, led by players including Bill Cartwright, who went on to play for the Knicks and the Chicago Bulls, the Dons returned to prominence, making several appearances in the N.C.A.A. tournament. However, for a series of violations, including boosters’ payments to athletes, questionable recruiting practices and tutors’ taking tests for players, the basketball program was twice put on probation by the N.C.A.A., in the 1979-80 and 1980-81 seasons. One coach resigned; another was fired.
Then, in June 1982, Quintin Dailey, who had averaged 25.2 points per game for the Dons the previous season, pleaded guilty to aggravated assault for an attack on a nursing student, who said she had been fearful of being raped but was not. 
Dailey was sentenced to three years’ probation — he went on to play 10 years in the N.B.A. — but when a court document revealed that he had acknowledged receiving $1,000 for a no-show job from a university booster, Father Lo Schiavo acted. He announced the suspension of the program in August, before the 1982-83 season began.
The basketball program, he said at the time, “was once a source of inspiration, respect and pride for this university and city.” 
“That tradition adds to the sadness engendered by what it has now become,” he went on. “Because of it, we have now been perceived as being hypocritical or naïve or inept or duplicitous, or perhaps some combination of all those. We have even had to suffer the accusation that we attempted to obstruct justice in order to protect a basketball player and preserve him for the team. 
“However unjust those perceptions are — and they are grossly unjust — everyone who cares about U.S.F. must recognize that those perceptions have developed as a product of the basketball program. We have no responsible choice but to rid the university of the burden of them.”
John Joseph Lo Schiavo was born in San Francisco on Feb. 25, 1925. His parents were immigrants from Salina, a minute island north of Sicily. His father and uncle ran a restaurant and candy shop.
Young John was an all-city basketball player at St. Ignatius High School. He studied philosophy at Gonzaga University in Spokane, Wash., where he received bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He was ordained a priest in 1955 after he joined the faculty at San Francisco. 
As president of the university, he oversaw capital campaigns that enabled it to acquire Lone Mountain College (formerly San Francisco College for Women), now a campus of the university; to expand the law school; and to build a recreation center. 
His administration balanced budgets, eliminated debt and increased the endowment more than eightfold, to $38.7 million from $4.6 million. New degree programs established included hospitality management, Judaic studies, Asia Pacific studies and sport management. After stepping down as president in 1991, he served as chancellor, concentrating on fund-raising and alumni relations.
Father Lo Schiavo “has done more good, raised more money and had a greater impact than anyone ever associated with the University of San Francisco,” a campus publication, USF magazine, declared in 2010. He is survived by several cousins.
In June 1983, Father Lo Schiavo announced that he would reinstate the basketball program for the 1985-86 season, limiting its recruiting to players from the Western part of the country to diminish the frenetic competition engendered by nationwide recruiting, and establishing stricter controls over booster donations and athletes’ academic life. 
“I am not unguarded about U.S.F.’s and this nation’s intercollegiate athletics in the future,” he wrote in an essay in The New York Times. “I am keenly aware that athletics — college and professional — is an intensely competitive industry in America. There are still risks for U.S.F., despite all the precautions and controls we might have.
“The real question,” he added, “is, ‘Can an athletic program based on the right principles survive and thrive in this stressful environment?’ I think so.”
Since then, the San Francisco basketball team has appeared in one N.C.A.A. tournament, in 1998, losing in the first round.
