ATLANTA — If the rapper and actor Ludacris knew who Pat Perez was, he didn’t act like it. When Perez and his wife, Ashley, ventured backstage after Ludacris performed for 45 minutes at a show before the Tour Championship, the entertainer posed with Ashley Perez and ignored her husband.
Pat Perez has the evidence in his smartphone, a picture from the downtown event, which showed Ludacris standing with his arm draped around Perez’s wife as Perez posed awkwardly next to him like a photo bomber. Perez didn’t care if he was getting the brushoff by the multiple Grammy winner. “Not at all,” he scoffed.
In fact, slights are the kindling that once fueled Perez’s PGA Tour career. He has kept his tour card for 16 consecutive seasons, a commendable streak of consistency that he wasn’t sure he would be able to extend after he had season-ending surgery for a torn labrum in his left shoulder in March of last year.
While Perez was on the mend, he said his equipment company informed him that it didn’t have any sponsorship money to give him for the 2016-17 season. That perceived snub provided ample motivation, he said, but not as much as an act of kindness.
As he prepared for a January return, Perez was sending letters to tournament directors asking for sponsors’ exemptions in case he didn’t earn enough money in his 15 starts on his major medical extension to keep his tour membership. Early on in his recovery, when he was hitting shots that maxed out at 6 yards, Perez was painfully aware of the uphill battle that he faced.
“It’s a scary thing,” he said.
He gradually started to feel like his old self, and then his comeback received a boost in the form of a call from the tournament director Todd Rhinehart, who offered him an exemption into last October’s CIMB Classic. The decision, Rhinehart said in an email from Malaysia, was a no-brainer because Perez “had supported the CIMB Classic for so many years.” He added, “We have been so happy for him to have such a wonderful year and bounce back the way he has.”
A grateful Perez tied for 33rd in Malaysia and recorded top-seven finishes in his next three starts, including his second career tour victory at the OHL Classic at Mayakoba.
The win, his first since the 2009 Bob Hope Classic, propelled Perez, 41, to his best season, culminating in his first appearance in the FedEx Cup playoff season finale. He is the oldest player in this week’s field and the third-oldest Tour Championship rookie, after the 44-year-old Vijay Singh in the playoffs’ first year in 2007 and the 42-year-old Jerry Kelly in 2009.
“The fact that I’m here, for one, and have done it at 41, coming back from surgery, it’s just fantasy land,” said Perez, who is two-under par through 54 holes, 10 strokes behind the leader, Paul Casey. Perez, Casey, 40, Charley Hoffman, 40, and Jason Dufner, 40, are the only four players over 39 in the field.
“I never thought it would take me this long to get here,” Perez added, “but it’s all worked out.”
Perez is a digression to this season’s millennials rule narrative. Three of four major winners (Brooks Koepka, Jordan Spieth and Justin Thomas) are 27 or younger and nine players under the age of 26 combined for 17 official tour victories. But Perez is roughly the same age as James Michener when he published the first of his more than 40 books, and he hopes his story will be an inspiration to late bloomers everywhere.
“All these kids that are coming up going, ‘Man, I’ve got to be that or I’m not going to be that great because these guys are doing it now and I’m not doing it,’ ” said Perez, who thought it was hard enough having to play in the shadow of the 79-time tour winner Tiger Woods, who is two months older.
“That was just one player, and you knew you were going to lose to him at least nine times a year, which was fine because that gave you a lot of other tournaments that you could win,” Perez said. “Now, any of these kids can win.”
Led by Spieth, six players aged 28 or younger entered the week ranked ahead of Perez, who was 11th in the FedEx Cup standings. For Perez to “beat these young punks,” as he affectionately refers to the gym rat pack, and win the FedEx Cup title, he needs to win the Tour Championship and have a lot of other dominoes fall: Spieth must finish tied for sixth or worse; Thomas must place in a three-way tie for third or worse; Dustin Johnson must finish in a three-way tie for second or worse; Marc Leishman must place in a tie for second or worse; and Jon Rahm must finish tied for second or worse.
Or as Perez put it, “It’s about the same odds as the Powerball.”
Perez faced about the same probabilities of reaching the par-5 18th green in two after his first-round drive found the right rough. In his earlier, more volatile, days, he almost certainly would have gone for the green, anyway, almost as if to punish himself for his previous shot, and ended up making a bogey or worse.
But while Perez was idle, he watched a lot of tournament golf on television, and what he saw prompted him to adopt a more prudent, less punitive, course management style. He knocked his second shot back into the fairway, short of the water hazard, hit a 227-yard third shot into a greenside bunker, then got up and down to save par.
“The juice wasn’t worth the squeeze,” Perez said. “I hit it in the water there and I make seven, I would have basically wasted the whole day to shoot even.”
Perez came back from his injury wiser, but also less angry. Instead of dwelling on the slights, he focuses on all the reasons he has to be grateful: his wife; his globe-trotting life; and Rhinehart’s exemption, which kick-started his comeback.
“I’m just a 41-year-old guy that had a great year, for once, and just hoping to continue on and see how much better I can get,” he said.
