In the world of Olympic sports, Richard W. Pound, the former chief of the World Anti-Doping Agency, is known as a straight talker who has no tolerance for corruption or doping.
After all, he’s the one who, after the cyclist Floyd Landis failed a drug test in 2006 with an insanely high ratio of testosterone to epitestosterone, said: “You’d think he’d be violating every virgin within 100 miles. How does he even get on a bicycle?”
Yet on Thursday, when Pound spoke at a news conference in Munich about the report he wrote for WADA regarding corruption and possible criminal behavior at the top levels of the International Association of Athletics Federations — the world’s governing body of track and field — he did not wield his verbal sword against the sport’s officials who he said helped facilitate systematic doping in Russia. He did not skewer those who, as the report suggested, watched as the cover-up unfolded all around them.
Instead, Pound basically brought flowers to the man at the top of the I.A.A.F., Sebastian Coe, its president.
“There’s an enormous amount of reputational recovery that needs to occur here, and I can’t think of anyone better than Lord Coe to do that,” he said.
Wait, how could that be? That’s the same Lord Coe who was a part of the I.A.A.F. Council which, according to the report, “could not have been unaware of the extent of doping in athletics and the nonenforcement of applicable antidoping rules.”
What had WADA done with the real Dick Pound?
Pound did not immediately return a phone call to explain his contradiction. So what I’ve surmised is that he was sticking with Coe because he considers it smarter to back the devil he knows than the one he might not know. With so much corruption in international sports, there would be no guarantee that Coe’s successor would be blemish-free.
Just look at the top officials at FIFA, soccer’s governing body. As soccer endures its own head-spinning corruption scandal, it has become comical to consider who might reform the organization as president when Sepp Blatter’s reign ends next month.
Michel Platini once was thought to be a lock to succeed Blatter. But, whoops, he was barred from the sport for eight years for accepting an unauthorized payment of $2 million from FIFA and is also under criminal investigation in Switzerland for it.
What about Sheikh Salman bin Ebrahim al-Khalifa of Bahrain, one of the five men on the ballot? Human rights organizations say that he and his family were responsible for the torture and imprisonment of pro-democracy protesters in 2011. Sheikh Salman denies the accusations.
Would Tokyo Sexwale get your vote? He was a member of the bid team and the organizing committee for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, which still faces questions about a $10 million payment that United States Justice Department officials have called a bribe.
It can be difficult to find purity at the top of international sports. In track and field, Coe, the former middle-distance star and Olympic champion, just might be the best option. He should serve his punishment for not speaking out against pervasive doping in track and field. His sentence: to clean up his dirty sport.
Some athletes who have been outspoken on doping issues, including Lauren Fleshman, a two-time national champion in the 5,000 meters, are willing to give Coe a second chance. She told me on Thursday that it was possible that Coe did not know the extent of the corruption at the I.A.A.F. because the organization was so big and disorganized.
“He could take this chance and be highly motivated and apply all of those skills that made him an elite athlete, conquering all the obstacles and all the doubt, and attack the I.A.A.F. with vigor,” Fleshman said. “He has to make some serious changes to earn people’s trust. Transparency is huge.”
I tend to agree. Coe should get a chance to do the right thing. He should consider stepping aside temporarily to let an independent reform committee take over the I.A.A.F. and rebuild its shoddy governance structure. Then Coe could return to run the federation like a public company.
Let transparency reign. Disclose financial results. Rid itself of nepotism. (See the story of the former I.A.A.F. president Lamine Diack and his son, Papa Massata Diack, who are both under criminal investigation in France for corruption in track and field.)
Coe should treat the I.A.A.F. as if it were beholden to shareholders — the sport’s fans and clean athletes — if he really wants track and field to rebound from this scandal.
Coe must get to work, and make changes now. With the Rio Olympics nearly six months away, the clock is ticking.
Which brings me to another curious thing Pound said: that the Russian track and field organization, which was suspended after it was found to operate a state-supported doping program, has a chance to be reinstated before the Rio Games. That means Russian track and field athletes could compete in Rio.
Just the thought of that makes Travis Tygart, the chief executive of the United States Anti-Doping Agency, fume because the Russian organization was given a chance to start rehabilitating itself when WADA’s first report was released, in November, but nothing has happened on that front since.
“They’re still attacking the brave and courageous whistle-blowers,” Tygart said of the Russians. “There is no lab. There’s no testing agency.”
He added: “We’re a few months before the Games and it’s too late, even if they hold all of those who are responsible accountable. It’s too late to assure that those in the state-supported doping program are clean.”
The feisty Dick Pound would have agreed. Many times, he told me that the benefits of doping could last 10 years or more, depending on the drug used, because the athlete was able to train much harder and recover much quicker.
Instead, he is suggesting opening the door to the Olympics to Russian runners and jumpers and throwers, though their presence at the Games would only make track and field look even more like a joke.
“There’s no reason they couldn’t be in shape to be readmitted into the Games in Rio,” he said Thursday.
One way to deter countries from even thinking about sponsoring teamwide doping is to kick them out of the Olympics for at least one Games when they violate the basic rules of clean sport.
“It would be a cleaner Games if they weren’t there,” Fleshman said about the Russian team.
And if WADA cannot have a perfectly clean Games, why shouldn’t it push for cleaner ones?
Seems simple. But the politics of sports makes it so hard.
