When I landed a job as a public defender in my hometown, Reno, Nev., fresh out of law school in 2004, I had no practical experience with the criminal justice system. I hadn’t volunteered with a legal aid organization, hadn’t even been on the mock trial team in school. I had never sat at a counsel table.
So when Sean, an attorney in the office who had been a public defender for a decade, took it upon himself to show me the ropes, I was all too eager to listen. He showed me how to get into the jail to visit my clients, when to fill out a D.U.I. waiver or file a motion to dismiss, how to prepare for evidentiary hearings and how to deal with belligerent clients and prosecutors.
Perhaps most important, he taught me how to fly fish.
My first setup was a $99 two-piece rod that came pre-rigged with a floating line and leader on a cheap plastic reel. In the late evening after work, I’d crack a beer and retreat to the backyard and cast away in the direction of a box elder tree. More often than not the line would land in a tangle at my feet. The next day I would explain my casting problem to Sean while we waited in the courtroom galley for our cases to be called, and he’d suggest a modified cadence, ask if I was keeping my casting arm straight.
With Sean as my guide, I took my new skills out onto the water for the first time on a windy late-winter day at Pyramid Lake, a desert lake 40 minutes north of Reno. It was a lousy day to fish by any measure, and few of my casts managed to make the water in the face of a nasty headwind. Our outing was cut short when, heading back to the car for some gear, I accidentally slammed the door on my fishing rod, snapping it in half.
But by that spring I was catching my first fish.
Fly fishing wasn’t just a pastime. It was about more than the need for escape, the desire to retreat into nature and away from the ugly realities of my job. Fly fishing, I quickly came to realize, offered membership into a certain group of attorneys in the legal community in Reno, men whose friendship, or at least fraternity, happened to be professionally useful — sometimes in ways that made me feel uneasy.
In the earliest stages of a criminal case, defense attorneys and prosecutors will congregate in courtroom lobbies and attempt to resolve their cases. A handful of the prosecutors, Sean explained, were fishermen as well. Before discussing the merits of our pending cases — drug offenses, child pornography, domestic abuse — I began chatting with these men about where they had fished the weekend before, what lures they had used and how cold the water had been. We’d take out our phones to show one another pictures of fish we’d landed, and we’d congratulate or rib one another, call over other lawyers to admire the photographs of the mottled bodies quivering in our hands.
In retrospect, I understand the problems of privilege that came with this informal brotherhood — just pick up an issue of American Angler, tell me how many women or minorities you come across. A female defense attorney I worked with would often send me to negotiate with the prosecutors on behalf of our team. “Go talk dude to them,” she’d say.
The notion that a personal rapport between prosecutors and defense attorneys can affect the outcome of a client’s case — might in fact shape the rest of his life — is an uncomfortable one. It is, however, a reality. And it can be argued that a defense attorney is ethically obligated to nurture good relationships with prosecutors, as unpleasant as it can feel to do so. If two opposing attorneys get along, the negotiations tend to go better for the defendant. In a weak case, an afternoon fishing trip might be the difference between a conviction and a dismissal, between a misdemeanor and a felony, between a year of probation and a year of prison.
It seemed, at times, that there was no limit to the access that fly fishing could afford. One day, a relative of mine with political aspirations managed to persuade the Supreme Court justice Antonin Scalia to join him and a group of lawyers and judges for an afternoon of fishing at a small lake in the Sierra Nevada — a place where I’d gone fishing with fellow public defenders and district attorneys over the years. I was asked to come along, and before I knew it I found myself stringing an olive Woolly Bugger to my fly rod (I’d long since upgraded to a high-performance four-piece Sage) next to the most conservative Supreme Court justice of my lifetime.
I spent the afternoon fishing from shore while Justice Scalia sat sullenly in a flat-bottomed boat equipped with a guide and an electronic fish finder. I hooked only one rainbow trout from shore, while Scalia pulled out close to a dozen, casting to the areas where the guide pointed.
There was something joyless about the afternoon. The other attorneys and judges took their runs at the justice, hoping to strike up a connection. Secret Service agents waited somberly on the shore for the day to end. There was no feeling of camaraderie, really. I had come along hoping for a story, hoping that the justice would be humanized in a way that fishing had the power to do. But instead it was only the melancholy act of throwing a plastic line into a lake.
Maybe it’s because nobody was drinking.
Public defender work is stressful: the high stakes, the angry and even frightening clients, the threats of violence that every public defender receives. After about five years, I left the job to go to graduate school in Ohio. Since then, I’ve pulled my fly rod out only a handful of times, and as I write this it sits in the dusty corner of a garage, below a pile of winter jackets and backpacks.
When I visit Reno, though, I still make a point to spend an afternoon with Sean on the Truckee River or at one of the nearby mountain lakes. We show each other pictures of our kids, and he includes a few pictures of trout he has landed recently. He tells me about the latest gossip from the courthouse, the trials that he has scheduled for the coming months. During these outings I occasionally find myself missing the excitement of the job, the rush that comes when a person’s fate is in your hands, and these moments of estrangement seem somehow to hold the answer to why I’ve stopped fishing.
I still enjoy the feel of the water pooling around my waders as I stalk a deep hole, the iridescent greens and browns when I open a box full of Copper Johns and Midges and Parachute Adams flies, the way the line goes electric when a trout strikes. But now, when I am lucky enough to feel a strike, it’s with the knowledge that there is only a fish at stake.
