RIO DE JANEIRO — During downtime at the Rio Games, staff members from The New York Times keep mulling over a question:
If you had to participate in one sport in the Summer Games, which would it be?
We’ve come up with a bunch of answers and rationales — see below — and now we would like to hear from readers.
First, some caveats. It is assumed, for the purposes of this mental exercise, that you are going to lose lopsidedly or, in the case of team sports, fail epically. In fact, all of you weekend warrior runners, former college soccer stars, judo red belts — don’t choose your specialty and then explain that it’s because you would fare pretty well, if you do say so yourself.
Nope. Let’s assume that you are going to come up waaay short. In fact, you are going to be humiliated. The question, really, is in what context will you endure this humiliation.
Another caveat: You have to compete. No choosing, say, basketball and then suggesting that you could somehow sit on the bench the whole time.
Now, to get you going, here are some of our answers:
Becky Hanger I’m watching trampoline finals right now, and that would be my choice. I’d be terrible, for sure. But it looks like so much fun! (Also, they surely don’t televise this, do they?)
Christopher Clarey Long jump. Because it’s one competitor at a time. The sand’s soft for a bad landing and raked so nobody knows how far the last guy went. Bonus: My American friends don’t really do the metric system, so they won’t know how far I didn’t fly.
Sarah Lyall I’m going with racewalking. All the competitors look ridiculous, so no extra embarrassment there. I am from New York and walk fast anyway. You can hide in the pack of other athletes at the beginning of the race, and then, when they all pass you, you can whip on a Rio 2016 sweatshirt, racewalk off the course and mingle with the spectators.
Talya Minsberg I guess I’d have to vote trampoline. I can just imagine the commentators. “She just … she’s only jumping and adding a twist every once in a while. No complex skills whatsoever. But she does seem to be enjoying herself.”
Alexandra Garcia Table tennis. Because when I lose, I can blame it on the new balls they are using!
Rebecca R. Ruiz Rhythmic gymnastics. Short routines, with opportunity to integrate ribbon accouterments, sparkling accessories and jazzy music that might help distract from the content of the competition itself.
Andrew Keh Rhythmic gymnastics. As you all know, I’ve been gifted in life with a truly expressive body. And I think if I closed my eyes, let myself get lost in the music, and waved that ribbon like I was alone dancing in my apartment, I could be an underdog podium threat. A caipirinha would help.
Ken Belson The 10-meter air pistol is the way to go. No one watches it. There’s no chance of injury. There’s a one-in-a-million chance I’d succeed. Also, it’s the first event in the Olympics, so you can get out of Dodge quickly.
Joe Ward When I was a kid, I played a mean game of table tennis against my mother on our dining room table. I think I’ve still got it.
Michael Powell The marathon. Sprint like hell at the beginning to stay with the crowd. Once you go around a couple of corners, revert to 12-minute miles. By the time I got to the finish line, everyone has packed up and gone. It’s all about minimizing humiliation.
Jeré Longman I second the marathon. People love to cheer on stragglers and lovable losers. You would get lots of sympathy, not to mention having every water stop to yourself. And you would get to write a funny story about finishing last.
Jim Luttrell Put me in the pool. Fifty-meter freestyle. I’d be a crowd favorite once they saw my flabby body on the block, cute little paunch hanging over my suit. A stark difference between me and the zero-body-fat Adonises. I’d draw laughs with my probable belly flop and more laughs when the crowd realized my goggles came off in the process. But I’d finish, damn it. I’d bow to the crowd and no doubt become an internet sensation, which is my goal in life to begin with.
Scott Blumenthal I’d get in the boxing ring. I’ve been training in Muay Thai for about seven years, and while I don’t flatter myself that I’m good, I can hold my own in my gym. So I’m curious. How long would I last? Could I land a punch? Could I take more than one shot from one of these guys? And even though I’d end up unconscious, with my nose busted, I’d feel proud to have given it a go.
Anna Jean Kaiser Rowing coxswain. Even if you do mess up everyone’s rhythm, the audience can’t tell it’s your fault.
Karen Crouse I want another shot at the 100-meter butterfly. Put me in one of those fast suits after I’ve had a little cupping therapy, and watch me go!
Victor Mather Team handball goalie. Just stand there and wave your arms. Most of the time they don’t save it, anyway. Drawback is, you get a ball thrown hard at your face occasionally.
Terri Ann Glynn I would have to go with water polo. I’m good at treading water.
Naila-Jean Meyers Platform diving looks cool, but I have a healthy fear of heights, so that’s out unless I want to win a gold medal in panic attacks. And I wouldn’t want to be out there on my own, so I’m bringing someone with me. Thus, I’m going with synchronized springboard diving. After a simple pike, we just hang in the hot tub until our next dive. (My caveat: This answer applies only if the pool isn’t green.)
Juliet Macur I’d say rowing. Bad thing: It would be extremely painful, and I might pass out at the finish, flip my boat and drown. Good thing: There are relatively few fans of rowing, so the number of people who would watch me flail would be limited.
As for me, I’d choose fencing. Few people know what great fencing looks like, which means that you could probably fool some onlookers simply by doing your “Three Musketeers” impression. Also, if you have watched a competition, you know that both athletes often fist-pump and celebrate after an attack. In other words, you could pretend to have won at various moments, even if you never landed a touch.
Best of all, you get to wear a mask. You can compete, lose and still keep a fig leaf of dignity because nobody will see your face.
O.K., readers. Choose an event, and then give us a line or two to explain your choice.
