CINCINNATI — The Futures Game is the last of the showcase events for players on the rise. Most of them are used to the attention, being veterans of the prospect scene, and the setting — a major league park — is nothing new to many elite young players, who often play only baseball as amateurs.
Michael Conforto, the Mets’ great offensive hope, does not believe in that kind of specialization. His father, Mike, was a linebacker for Penn State in the 1970s. His mother, Tracie Ruiz-Conforto, won two gold medals in synchronized swimming at the 1984 Olympics.
Michael Conforto played football — quarterback and safety — through high school, near Seattle, and would have played basketball if he had been good enough. Conforto, perhaps, would not be on the cusp of the majors if he had played only baseball.
“I think it’s incredibly important to play as many sports” as possible, Conforto said Sunday by his locker in the home clubhouse at Great American Ball Park. “I learned things in football that I couldn’t learn anywhere else. I also had to learn the difference between the two. In football, you go from playing on pure emotion — you can run around; if you get angry, you can hit somebody — and then you had to learn to switch it over to baseball, where you can’t do that. If you respond emotionally in baseball, you’re going to play worse.”
He added: “Being a quarterback in high school is learning how to be a leader and do all those things. I think that’s really important. If I have a son, I’m definitely going to want him to play more than one sport. I wouldn’t want him to specialize in something. I wouldn’t want him to get burned out.”
The popularity of year-round baseball has been blamed for contributing to the rise in reconstructive elbow operations among developing pitchers. The cost of the travel circuit, combined with the limited number of baseball scholarships in the N.C.A.A., has furthered the notion that baseball is a sport for the rich.
Yet for every Conforto, who benefited from playing football, there is a player who might have thrived with a more focused developmental path.
Amir Garrett, a hard-throwing Class A pitcher for the Cincinnati Reds, played basketball at St. John’s and said he believed he would be in the N.B.A. if he had dedicated himself to that sport. After the Reds drafted him and gave him a $1 million bonus, he played both for a while, with mixed results.
“When you’re going back and forth all the time, you can’t really get better,” Garrett said. “When I focused on baseball, I felt like I got 20 times better.”
Reflecting on the rocky start to his professional baseball career, Garrett said he was confused, athletically, by playing both sports. He added: “My mind was all cluttered; I didn’t really know what I wanted to do. I was just a thrower back then. Now I’m becoming a pitcher.”
Even so, Garrett said that he was glad he had pursued both sports for a while and that he would not have changed a thing. To be at the Futures Game tends to validate one’s career choices.
Conforto, who played only baseball at Oregon State, is far more polished than Garrett less than a year after making his professional debut. Drafted 10th over all last June, Conforto is hitting .312 with a .394 on-base percentage and a .475 slugging percentage in 37 games with Class AA Binghamton.
His relative inexperience — and the lack of an obvious spot in New York, with the veteran Michael Cuddyer in left field — has kept Conforto in the minors. The Mets swept Arizona heading into the All-Star break, but they cannot rely on sweet-swinging pitchers and three-homer days by Kirk Nieuwenhuis to carry their offense.
Other teams have promoted their best hitting prospects from Class AA, and Conforto has noticed. With sound mechanics and a sophisticated understanding of the strike zone, he believes he can help the Mets now.
“I see guys go up, and it’s exciting; it’s cool to see that,” said Conforto, who singled twice for the United States team in a 10-1 victory over the World team. “You love watching them. Everyone’s going to compare themselves to those guys, being a prospect and being someone who’s been talked about. 
“I will say, yeah, I’ve pictured myself as that person, and I do think I’m ready. But it’s not my call. All I can do is prepare myself and show up wherever I’m at with the right attitude and the right work ethic. My play on the field will speak for itself.”
Conforto’s teammate Brandon Nimmo, an outfielder, was also at the Futures Game but is not as close to the majors. Nimmo is another draft prize from the Mets’ lean years, taken 13th over all in 2011 as a raw talent from Wyoming. He is hitting .289, with a .351 on-base percentage and a .382 slugging percentage, at Binghamton.
“I still feel like I’m light-years away,” Nimmo said, adding that he believed his power would develop. “I still feel like I have a lot to learn. But at Double-A, you are only a phone call away. You’ve got to realize that.”
Two of the five players drafted just after Nimmo — Miami’s Jose Fernandez and Oakland’s Sonny Gray — have already become major league All-Stars. They are starting pitchers, though, and the Mets have a stable of those. They need more offense, and it was in Cincinnati on Sunday.
“I think we have something coming in the future,” Nimmo said, enthusiastically, before acknowledging the obvious. “I know everybody’s been saying that for a long time.”
