Dinny Phipps was as much a part of the landscape of the Oklahoma training track at Saratoga Race Course as the oak trees that Sunny Jim Fitzsimmons planted nearly 100 years ago and continue to shade the family’s barn. Most August mornings, Phipps sat out front in a golf cart and talked horses with jockeys and exercise riders, clockers and fellow owners.
Behind him, his grandchildren darted between and behind impeccably bred thoroughbreds, their moms and dads keeping a watchful but never worried eye on them. After all, they, too, had once treated the shedrow as their summer playground. The smell of bacon wafted from the kitchen that looked out on the courtyard. The morning usually ended there with three generations of Phippses sitting down for breakfast.
When the family returns to its barn at the finest racetrack in America, a seat at that table will be empty and a big hole in the heart of American horse racing will be apparent. Ogden Mills Phipps died on Wednesday at 75.
Dinny was as old school as his given name. His ancestors were attached to the Carnegie steel empire. The family’s Bessemer Trust, established with that original fortune, now manages more than $88 billion for some of the world’s wealthiest people. It was thoroughbreds, however, that quickened his blood.
Phipps was a survivor of racing’s golden age, and one of things that he was most proud of was how his family had successfully handed down its love of horses through the generations. The Phippses have spent hundreds of millions of dollars over the years following a blueprint that rewards patience.
Dinny Phipps bred horses to race them — a shockingly quaint notion in an era when unproven colts and fillies are paraded through an auction ring and often fetch millions of dollars. He didn’t hurry still-developing 2-year-olds to the racetrack or retire his colts to stallion duty as soon as they won a couple of big races. Horses as old as 4 might run their first race in the family’s traditional black silks and cherry jockey cap and continue to run at 6 or 7.
Phipps was a big man with a poker face and was given to laconic pronouncements.
“Pigs get fed, hogs get slaughtered,” he often said about investing.
“We are about the fillies: They provide consistency over generations,” he said of the family’s breeding strategy.
But Phipps also was a warm conversationalist whose eyes twinkled when he told how, in the 1940s, when he was too young to be legally allowed on the racetrack, his father, Ogden, got him a seat on the starting gate at Saratoga every afternoon the family had a horse running.
He also laughed at how his family’s mistakes remained part of thoroughbred racing lore.
In 1936, Gladys Mills Phipps sold an underperforming 3-year-old who became a Depression-era hero by the name of Seabiscuit. In 1969, the family won a coin toss with Penny Chenery but chose to wait a year for a son or daughter of its Bold Ruler, passing up the chance to own Secretariat, the 1973 Triple Crown champion.
Still, his family raised and raced champions in staggering numbers. Among them was the undefeated Personal Ensign, who caught the Kentucky Derby-winning filly Winning Colors at the wire of the 1988 Breeders’ Cup Distaff in her 13th and final race. He won his first and only Kentucky Derby in 2013 with a colt named Orb, who became dear to him not because he was ultra-accomplished, but, rather, because he was owned in partnership with his cousin Stuart Janney III and prompted an outpouring of good wishes from the public.
“So many people were happy for us, and it has been very moving,” he said in the days after the race.
The biggest legacy he left to the sport, however, was a result of his 32-year run as chairman of the Jockey Club, a company that started out as a breed registry, but one he transformed into a technology, media and research conglomerate. Its offshoots have poured tens of millions of dollars back into making the sport safer and more humane.
It didn’t always make Phipps the most popular man in the sport, especially when he pushed for stricter drug rules and stiffer punishment for cheaters. It speaks to the sport’s fundamental problem that horse trainers and some owners vilified Phipps for wanting thoroughbreds to be drug-free and to be treated and cherished like the wonderful athletes that they are during their careers as well as after they left the track.
“Quite simply, I see it as a way of giving back to a sport that has provided me with so much enjoyment,” he told the International Federation of Horseracing Authorities. “That was probably passed on to me from my dad, and I try to instill that sense of responsibility and commitment in my kids.”
For Christmas, his daughter Daisy gave her father a wall hanging with halter plates featuring the names of the 50 Grade I winners who raced for the family stable. He was deeply moved and even more tickled that she had left room for the names of 22 future Grade I winners.
His family clearly has accepted the challenge, and will continue to summer in Saratoga.
