MELBOURNE, Australia — A year ago, opening day at the Australian Open was overshadowed by the publication of a report that raised concerns about potentially widespread match fixing in tennis.
On Monday, organizers tried again to host the Open without the focus being diverted, despite a recent series of sanctions against lower-tier professional players.
The site of the Open, Melbourne Park, has undergone significant transformations, as is now customary. The changes for 2017 include the demolition of the main public entrance to Rod Laver Arena and the construction of a pedestrian bridge into the grounds from the banks of the Yarra River. There is also a revamped fan zone dedicated to the four Grand Slam cities. The Paris Quarter features a miniature Eiffel Tower and a gate that looks like one of Hector Guimard’s metro entrances. The New York section contains faux graffiti murals and a hot-dog stand.
Widely known as the Happy Slam, the Australian Open is also clearly the Busy Slam. The tournament drew a record 720,363 spectators in 2016 and is aiming to surpass that this year.
There are notable absentees: Juan Martín del Potro in the men’s tournament; Madison Keys, Victoria Azarenka, Petra Kvitova and the still-suspended Maria Sharapova in the women’s event. But there are plenty of stars to populate the main show courts under their retractable roofs. They include two 35-year-olds: Serena Williams and Roger Federer, who is back for his first official competition after a six-month injury break.
Federer, seeded just 17th this year, will fall lower in a hurry if he does not come close to matching his semifinal run in Melbourne last year, when he arrived healthy and departed with a knee in need of surgery. (He heard an ominous click post-tournament while running a bath for his children.)
He said the report that surfaced on opening day last year, which has not led to any major revelations, had taken him by surprise.
“I just find it unjustified when you come out and say there’s match fixing going on, but if you don’t have proof, it’s always super hard,” Federer said in a recent interview. “I expected much more to come out of it from Australia than just accusations, to be quite honest.”
The report did prompt the appointment of an independent review panel, which is in the later stages of investigating tennis’s anticorruption program, including the Tennis Integrity Unit, the game’s internal watchdog. David Haggerty, president of the International Tennis Federation, said Monday in a telephone interview from Indonesia that the panel was expected to deliver its interim report “in the next couple months” and its final report “by the end of the year, hopefully by the beginning of the third quarter.”
Haggerty and other leaders of the sport’s numerous governing bodies are funding the inquiry and have agreed to put in place and pay for all of its recommendations.
“I’m sure it will be a very thorough process, but the key for us, for me and the I.T.F., is we’re not going to wait for a final report to make improvements,” Haggerty said.
Tennis Australia, the country’s governing body for the sport, has already made moves, creating its own integrity unit and increasing player education and oversight. It also has reduced its sponsorship agreement with William Hill, a bookmaker whose logo is no longer on display on courts at this year’s Australian Open.
The Tennis Integrity Unit also has made significant changes ahead of the review panel’s report. Its staff has doubled to 10 employees, and its annual budget has been increased to $3.23 million this year from $2.4 million in 2016. It imposed sanctions on nine players and officials in 2016 — the most in any year in its history. Those penalized included two match officials from Turkey and two from Uzbekistan, all given lifetime bans for manipulating and selling scoring data to gamblers.
In an effort to be more transparent, the Tennis Integrity Unit has also begun regularly releasing information about its activities.
“We’re trying to make subtle changes to address these issues,” said Chris Kermode, the executive chairman and president of the ATP, “but it seems fairly evident that the issue is at the lower ranks, and that is going to be the challenge going forward.”
The vast majority of the match-fixing cases in tennis have occurred at the Futures level, the lowest level of professional tennis, where live scoring and data have allowed gamblers to place bets on in-match developments and not just on final results. Haggerty said the I.T.F. had increased its monitoring and was instituting credentialing restrictions and putting more monitors at match sites. But he said the sport was also considering a possible restructuring of lower-level circuits, including the Futures, in an attempt to reduce the scope of potential cheating and to provide a clearer pathway for talented young players.
The police in Australia and Spain have charged lower-tier players with match fixing in the last year. This month, the Tennis Integrity Unit barred the now-retired Australian player Nick Lindahl for seven years and fined him $35,000 for agreeing to throw a match at a Futures tournament — the lowest level of professional tennis — in Toowoomba, Australia, in 2013.
The most troubling recent case in Australia was on Jan. 5, when the police in the state of Victoria charged Oliver Anderson, 18, the reigning Australian Open boys’ champion, with engaging in match fixing during a Challenger tournament in Traralgon in October.
The Sydney Morning Herald reported that Anderson had been approached about throwing the first set of a first-round match against another Australian player, Harrison Lombe. Anderson lost the first set, 4-6, and then went on to win the next two sets, 6-0, 6-2.
“I think some of the recent announcements confirm the commitment tennis has to the integrity of the game,” Haggerty said. “I think it shows that the system is working, and I think investing in more investigators with the T.I.U. has increased the strength and is helping, but honestly, one match-fixing incident is too much. We have to have a zero tolerance.”
