Maria Sharapova, the Russian tennis star, won a partial victory in the world’s top sports court on Tuesday after appealing her two-year suspension for a doping violation.
Sharapova’s punishment will be reduced by nine months, the Court of Arbitration for Sport announced, ruling that the original penalty was disproportionately harsh for an infraction that Sharapova had committed unintentionally.
Sharapova, 29, tested positive for meldonium, a heart medication newly banned by antidoping regulators, at the Australian Open in January. She publicly disclosed the violation in March, days after she was privately notified of the lab results.
She will now be eligible to return to international competition on April 26, 2017, according to a statement from the International Tennis Federation — in time for the French Open and Wimbledon. Under the earlier ruling, she would have been suspended until Jan. 25, 2018.
Tuesday’s ruling may help Sharapova redeem her standing with sponsors that quickly distanced themselves from her when she was disciplined last spring.
Some companies, including Nike, expressed support for Sharapova, a five-time Grand Slam champion, while others, like Porsche, said they would wait until the court delivered its ruling to decide whether to continue their relationship. A spokeswoman for Porsche said Tuesday that the company planned to discuss “a future collaboration” in coming weeks.
“I’ve gone from one of the toughest days of my career,” Sharapova said in a statement Tuesday, alluding to her initial suspension in March, “to, now, one of the happiest days.”
Head, the sports equipment company that is one of Sharapova’s sponsors, issued congratulations on “justice being served,” defending Sharapova’s actions and adding that there were inconsistencies in doping control and disciplinary procedures.
“There is an urgent need for a wholesale comprehensive review and change to the antidoping system,” wrote Johan Eliasch, the company’s chairman and chief executive. On Saturday, global sports officials are due to discuss antidoping reform at an Olympic summit in Switzerland. Eliasch specified problems with identifying performance-enhancing drugs and communicating associated risks to athletes.
Meldonium, which is believed to improve blood flow and accelerate an athlete’s recovery while training, was not banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency until 2016. Sharapova has said she was unaware that use of the drug in international sports had been restricted.
She had taken the substance since 2006, she said, to treat an array of health problems, including frequent bouts of the flu, the possible onset of diabetes and a magnesium deficiency.
She said she failed to read an email in 2015 indicating that the drug would be prohibited the following year.
In June, a disciplinary panel appointed by the International Tennis Federation accepted Sharapova’s claim that the violation had been accidental, a finding that spared her from a suspension of up to four years.
Imposing the original two-year punishment, the panel said she bore “very significant fault” and “sole responsibility” for the positive test. (Her manager, who typically monitored changes in prohibited substances, had also been unaware of the medication’s changed status.)
Appealing to the sports arbitration court — the final authority on global sports disputes — Sharapova argued at a hearing in New York last month that tennis officials had not done enough to publicize the change and that two years was a disproportionately harsh penalty.
“This was an honest administrative mistake,” said John Haggerty, a lawyer for Sharapova. “There was no intent to cheat.”
A panel of three arbitrators — two from the United States and one from Italy — accepted that explanation but noted in a 28-page decision that even though the offense was inadvertent, it nonetheless constituted a violation of the rules that warranted a 15-month suspension.
The sports court has a history of reducing the disciplinary penalties imposed by tennis officials; Sharapova’s partial win follows similar ones by Marin Cilic of Croatia and Viktor Troicki of Serbia, decisions delivered in 2013.
The recent meldonium ban has resulted in a rash of failed drug tests among East European athletes this year, predominantly Russians.
Russian coaches and sports officials have said taking meldonium is a common and longstanding method to increase energy and stamina, disputing the notion that the substance enhances athletic performance. Some experts, too, have disagreed with the idea that it might deliver an unfair advantage, though effects of the drug on athletes are hazy.
The Russian tennis federation said this year that it had been unaware that Sharapova used meldonium, which she said she obtained in Russia. (The substance is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States, where Sharapova has been based for more than two decades.)
According to the International Tennis Federation, Sharapova said she informed the Russian Olympic team’s doctor in 2015 that she was taking the drug. She had not, however, disclosed her chronic use of it to antidoping authorities, who routinely request that athletes identify all medications they have recently taken when providing test samples.
Few people in her entourage other than her manager knew she took the medication, according to Sharapova. Her selective disclosures, the tennis disciplinary panel wrote last summer, “must inevitably lead to the conclusion” that she took meldonium to enhance performance; Sharapova denied that, asserting that the drug was a method to protect her health.
“There’s no scientific evidence that this is a substance that should even be on the prohibited list,” Haggerty said Tuesday, noting that point had been central to Sharapova’s appeal.
Although the tennis federation delivered a stiff punishment in June, the panel chose to backdate Sharapova’s suspension to the date of her initial infraction, in January, citing her cooperation and swift admission of a mistake.
Still, Sharapova — fighting to keep her sponsors and return to the professional circuit — said she would not accept the “unfairly harsh” penalty.
At the time of her initial suspension, Sharapova was among the top 10 players in the world; she is currently ranked 95th. But she will have no ranking points, which accumulate over the previous 52 weeks, by the time she is reinstated in late April.
She will therefore have no ranking when the French Open entry list is determined in early April, and will have few opportunities to gain ranking points before Wimbledon’s entry list is finalized in early May. To enter tournaments without a ranking, or with an insufficient ranking, Sharapova would need to receive wild cards for each event.
The suspension is a couple days too long to clear her in time for a Porsche-sponsored tournament in Stuttgart, Germany, in April. A possible comeback event for her — for which she would also need a wild card — is the Madrid Open in early May. She won that tournament in 2014.
In her statement Tuesday, Sharapova criticized the tennis federation for, she said, not clearly explaining the change in rules, saying she had “learned how much better other federations were at notifying their athletes of the rule change, especially in Eastern Europe.”
She added: “I hope the I.T.F. and other relevant tennis antidoping authorities will study what these other federations did, so that no other tennis player will have to go through what I went through.”
