PARIS — A wet and gloomy opening day at the French Open seemed to be a better day for a double feature: two Roland Garros documentaries, to be precise.
The first — “The French,” by William Klein — was released in 1982 and tells the inside story of the 1981 French Open, the last Grand Slam tournament that Bjorn Borg won.
The second — “In the French,” by Géraldine Maillet — was shown on French television Saturday and will be released on DVD on Monday. It tells the not nearly so inside story of last year’s French Open.
But then Maillet, a quick-talking former fashion model, quickly found out what she was getting herself into.
“It was really tough to make the movie,” she said Sunday. “In one way, it was easy because the French federation gave me carte blanche, but we didn’t have the access like in Klein’s era. Klein is in the locker room. He’s in the massage room. Ilie Nastase smokes. Chris Evert cleans her own skirt.”
Maillet said she had tried to get comparable access, “but it was as if people didn’t even understand the concept intellectually.”
Viewed back to back, Klein’s film and Maillet’s are true bookends, reflecting all that has been lost and gained as professional tennis and big-time sports have become ever more ubiquitous yet ever more out of reach.
“We have shut off the sound,” Yannick Noah, the French star, says wistfully in Maillet’s film.
All of today’s sports agents should take a two-hour break from texting to screen “The French” and consider what exactly it is that they are saving their clients from.
As a viewer, I found myself thinking, They really let Klein in there to film that? And yet I also found myself thinking, This is real; I can truly relate to this, and above all to them, certainly to a degree that I never approach working through another ghostwritten article in The Players’ Tribune in which an athlete speaks “directly” to the people with a rich vocabulary and polished syntax that bear little resemblance to the voice of that player I once interviewed.
Unfiltered was part of the plan when Klein, a French-American photographer and filmmaker, accepted the invitation of the French Tennis Federation’s innovative president, Philippe Chatrier, a former journalist, to visit Roland Garros.
Not everyone cooperated, not even then. John McEnroe steered clear, although one of his on-court rants about playing in the rain is there for posterity. But many of the stars bought in.
You see a young Noah hobbling to the trainer’s table immediately after leaving the court. This is Noah before dreadlocks, two years before he became a national hero by winning the French Open, and he is suffering as he strips down to his jockstrap and receives deep massage on his thighs and repair work on the blistered soles of his feet.
You see Nastase, the Romanian tennis genius long past his prime, clowning for Evert and Virginia Ruzici, Nastase’s fellow Romanian star, in the players’ lounge. You hear snippets of conversation from coaches, talking openly in the players’ boxes about their charges’ strengths and weaknesses and hopes and fears.
There is no narrator in Klein’s film. The images and the protagonists’ voices do the driving — a fresh approach at the time, and one he also used in his documentary “Muhammad Ali: The Greatest.”
Boxing and tennis — mano a mano, ego a ego with nowhere to seek shelter — have much in common psychologically. The pace in “The French” is slow, but there is a rawness to the language and the expressions that gives it a sense of urgency.
The game itself was slower, too. Many of the 1981 rackets were made of wood, including Borg’s Donnay model with the extra-long grip to accommodate his two-handed backhand. Though Borg’s loose-limbed athleticism would have translated into success in any era, there is a leisurely look to the rallies and an artisanal quality to the shotmaking that underscore just how far tennis has come in the fast-twitch department.
Which is, in part, where Maillet comes in. “In 1981, there was that rock ’n’ roll side, that bad-boy side,” she said. “But the spectacle that we see in terms of the tennis itself today is so sublime.”
She first saw “The French” in 1997 after meeting Klein while working as a model in New York.
“He told me, ‘I love tennis; fashion bugs the hell out of me,’ ” she said. “And I said: ‘Me, too. I do fashion to make a living, but I love tennis.’ So I got his film on VHS, and went, Ohhh, this is fantastic.”
But it was not until she watched it a second time in January 2015 that she became determined to make her own film.
“I got a shock watching it again,” she said. “And I realized we are living in a tennis era now that is as exceptional as that one in terms of the rivalries. Borg-McEnroe. Djokovic-Nadal.”
She added, “Everyone who knew Klein’s film said it was a super idea, impossible, but what a super idea.”
Maillet’s film opens with Borg, now nearly 60, walking the walk of a younger man in a passageway at Roland Garros. “I think my generation, with the guys and the girls, we started something big in tennis,” Borg says in the film.
Big business, in fact — something Klein made clear in 1981 when he filmed Borg patiently exchanging balls and posing for photographs with a group of French youngsters in a sponsor-mandated appearance before the tournament.
“For me, it was important, the link between Borg and today,” Maillet said. “He is the link to this time when the top players are multinational corporations and marketing tools.”
Borg is as cool in Klein’s film as he is in memory — a steady boat amid the waves of adulation (if you think on-court security has been lax at Roland Garros in recent years, watch “The French”). But his championship days were nearly over, with his loss to McEnroe in the Wimbledon final only a few weeks away.
Klein captures hints of world-weariness behind Borg’s Nordic mask, and the ability to isolate the gesture that speaks volumes is a strength that Maillet shares in her tour of the Roland Garros ecosystem.
A fine example is her montage of Rafael Nadal flailing and looking resigned as he goes down in straight sets against Djokovic in last year’s anticlimax of a quarterfinal. Another is Serena Williams practicing her serve on an outside court, receiving the ball from her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, and slamming it and her racket into the clay in a fit of poker-faced pique.
But the best comes after Djokovic is stunned by Wawrinka in the final.
As Wawrinka celebrates, Maillet keeps her camera on Djokovic as he sits courtside in his chair, drained and staring into the void.
“Did you realize how long he was sitting there like that?” Maillet asked.
She may not have gotten deep inside their locker room, but she at least managed to get deep inside their heads on court. And there was no bitterness in her voice about the trade-off.
“It would have been a lie to film Roland Garros like Klein, because this era does not tell that story,” she said. “This is an era with so much money in play. You don’t ask the players for the time. You ask the agent, who asks another agent, and then the ATP, the I.T.F. and the federation. I wanted to depict the DNA of 2015.”
