Russia on Sunday filed a formal appeal of the doping ban imposed on its track and field team that would keep it out of the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro next month.
Konstantin Vybornov, a spokesman for the Russian Olympic Committee, confirmed that the appeal had been filed with the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Lausanne, Switzerland. The appeal will be heard on July 19.
The ban by the International Association of Athletics Federations, track and field’s governing body, already allows a small number of Russians to compete if they can show they have been based outside the country and subject to testing from a respected antidoping agency.
Alexandra Brilliantova, of the Russian committee’s legal department, said she believed that only two Russians would currently fit the criteria out of more than 80 who have applied.
The I.A.A.F. has approved an application from the whistle-blower Yuliya Stepanova, a middle-distance runner.
BARRED TURK CAN RACE The Olympic gold medalist Asli Cakir Alptekin of Turkey was cleared to race again during her appeal of an eight-year suspension for blood doping.
Alptekin was suspended in August and gave up her 1,500-meter gold medal from the 2012 Olympics. But she appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport to reduce the ban, saying she had assisted a corruption inquiry.
Stephen Strasburg did not get his first career no-hitter, but he did keep his undefeated record.
Strasburg was removed from a no-hit bid in the seventh inning and Cincinnati’s Ramon Cabrera singled to lead off the next inning as Washington beat the visiting Reds, 12-1.
Strasburg (11-0), who was activated from the disabled list before the game after missing two starts because of an upper back strain, struck out five and walked four.
Danny Espinosa homered twice, including his second grand slam in four games, and Wilson Ramos, Bryce Harper and Anthony Rendon hit solo shots for Washington.
MARLINS PLAY BRAVES ON ARMY BASE  J. T. Realmuto homered and drove in two runs, and the Miami Marlins beat the Atlanta Braves, 5-2, at Fort Bragg, N.C. It was the first regular-season game, in any sport, on an active military base.
AROUND THE MAJORS Ian Kinsler hit his 200th career homer as Detroit won at Tampa Bay, 5-1, and extended its winning streak to six. Seth Smith hit his first career grand slam, and Seattle beat visiting Baltimore, 9-4. Troy Tulowitzki had a three-run homer, Russell Martin homered and drove in five runs, and host Toronto routed Cleveland, 17-1.
Peter Sagan of Slovakia ended a three-year winless run at the Tour de France, capturing the second stage and the leader’s yellow jersey in Cherbourg-en-Cotentin, France.
Sagan powered past the French rider Julian Alaphilippe on the final sprint to win the steep, short climb. He held an eight-second lead over Alaphilippe. Alejandro Valverde of Spain was in third, 10 seconds back.
Sagan’s Tinkhoff teammate Alberto Contador, a two-time Tour de France winner, crashed for the second time in two days and fell 1 minute 2 seconds off the lead.
Manu Ginobili intends to play a 15th N.B.A. season, though he did not say if it would be with the Spurs.
Ginobili, 39, declined a player option for next season with San Antonio, where he has spent his entire N.B.A. career. In the announcement posted in Spanish on his personal blog, Ginobili said he would have more news soon.
LIBERTY LOSE IN LOS ANGELES Nneka Ogwumike had 22 points and the Los Angeles Sparks beat the visiting Liberty, 77-67. Tina Charles had 27 points for the Liberty, who were held to their lowest point total of the season.
AROUND BASKETBALL Jamal Crawford, the N.B.A.’s sixth man of the year last season, agreed to return to the Los Angeles Clippers under a three-year contract, according to news reports. Crawford, 36, a former Knick, averaged 14.2 points last season. The free-agent point guard Rajon Rondo agreed to a two-year contract with the Chicago Bulls, according to news reports.
In his first start since winning the United States Open, Dustin Johnson ran off three birdies on the back nine to win the Bridgestone Invitational in Akron, Ohio.
Johnson closed with a four-under-par 66 and was helped to his third World Golf Championship title when Jason Day faltered.
Day, the world’s No. 1 player, was tied for the lead when he came apart with a double bogey on the par-5 16th. He did not hit a green in regulation over his last six holes.
TWO IN A ROW FOR TEENAGERBrooke Henderson, 18, shot a final-round 71 to successfully defend her title at the L.P.G.A. Portland Open in Oregon. The last back-to-back winner at Portland was Annika Sorenstam in 2002 and 2003.
