Frank Chapot, a two-time Olympic silver medalist who as competitor and coach was a mainstay of United States show jumping for half a century, died on Monday in Bound Brook, N.J. He was 84.
His wife and fellow Olympic rider, Mary Mairs Chapot, confirmed his death.
Chapot (his surname is pronounced like the French word for hat) was long considered one of the world’s foremost athletes in his sport.
He competed in six Olympic Games and coached the United States Equestrian Team’s show-jumping squad in six more. Under his stewardship, the squad garnered nine Olympic medals, including two golds.
After retiring from competition, he was a renowned breeder and trainer of show jumpers at Chado Farms, his family’s business in Neshanic Station, N.J. He also designed show-jumping courses and judged competitions.
In show jumping, a rider propels a horse at speed through a course laced with obstacles — fences, walls, water, hairpin turns — which they must clear within an allotted time.
As they control their hurtling mounts, riders confront a series of split-second decisions: How fast should we go? How many strides should we take between obstacles? From what angle should we approach each one?
Chapot was first named to the United States team in 1955, becoming, at 23, its youngest member.
The next year, he competed in his first Olympic Games, in Stockholm. (Though the 1956 Games took place in Melbourne, the equestrian events were held in Sweden as a result of Australia’s restrictive quarantine laws, which made it impossible for competitors to bring in their horses in time.)
He rode in five more Games, from 1960 to 1976, winning two Olympic team silvers. The first, at the Rome Games in 1960, came aboard Trail Guide, a 21-year-old former United States Cavalry horse; the second, in Munich in 1972, was on White Lightning.
For many years, Chapot was a fixture at the National Horse Show in Madison Square Garden, where he often took top honors.
He married Mary Mairs, a United States teammate, in 1965. They competed with each other in the team events — and against each other in the individual — at the 1964 Olympics, in Tokyo; the 1968 Games, in Mexico City; and in many other contests.
Show jumping is one of the few sports in which men and women are pitted directly against each other, a rivalry that the Chapots were to experience repeatedly in their long, competitive careers.
Over time, her husband may have had a slight edge, Mary Chapot said in a telephone interview on Friday.
“Probably he did, but it leveled out,” she said. “It was actually more fun for us, because we had two chances.”
Frank Chapot’s many other laurels include a bronze medal at the 1974 world championships, the Grand Prix of New York and the King George V Gold Cup in Britain. He was named horseman of the year for 1969 by the American Horse Shows Association.
Chapot was inducted into the United States Show Jumping Hall of Fame, as was his wife.
In Chapot’s first Olympics as coach, the 1984 Games in Los Angeles, his riders won individual gold and silver medals and a team gold; in his last, the 2004 Games in Athens, they won individual and team silvers. In between, there were three more silvers and a bronze.
The son of Frank Joseph Chapot and the former Dorothy Davis, Frank Davis Chapot was born on Feb. 24, 1932, in Camden, N.J. He was reared on his parents’ horse farm in Walpack, N.J.
After earning a bachelor’s degree from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Chapot spent two years in the Air Force while continuing to compete in show jumping.
Because he plied his amateur career in an era when amateurism entailed precisely that — athletes were barred from earning money from their sports — Chapot made his living in those years as a leather-goods salesman.
Besides his wife, Chapot’s survivors include their daughters, Laura Chapot and Wendy Chapot Nunn, both accomplished show jumpers; and three grandchildren.
Chapot was also responsible for heirs of a highly unusual sort. The most renowned horse that Chapot bred and trained was the gray thoroughbred Gem Twist, whose father, Good Twist, he had ridden in competition to great acclaim.
The son outpaced the father: Gem Twist brought the United States silver medals in the individual and team competitions at the Seoul Olympics in 1988. Named horse of the year three times by the American Grand Prix Association, he was widely considered the greatest show jumper in history.
Such a horse would be highly sought after for breeding, but there was an impediment: Gem Twist was a gelding — a castrato, in operatic parlance.
But where nature could not oblige, perhaps, Chapot realized, science could.
“His ears pricked up when the news came about Dolly the sheep,” Mary Chapot said on Friday. “And we just thought, ‘How ridiculous.’ And then he went and did it.”
With the aid of Cryozootech, a French genetics laboratory, Chapot, using genetic material from Gem Twist, had him cloned.
Gem Twist, who died in 2006, has since given rise to two clones: Gemini, born in 2008, and Murka’s Gem, born in 2011.
Gemini, now at stud in France, has sired more than 30 colts so far, Mary Chapot said, perpetuating the line of Gem Twist in defiance of time-honored expectation.
