The Court of Arbitration for Sport ruled Monday that Gibraltar’s soccer association had the right to become a member of FIFA, a decision that could allow Gibraltar’s national team to earn last-minute admission into the qualifying process for the 2018 World Cup.
The ruling by a three-person panel comes after years of court battles, political maneuvering and rejection surrounding Gibraltar’s bid for membership in FIFA, soccer’s global governing body. Gibraltar’s quest for full membership is still subject to a vote by FIFA at its annual congress in Mexico next week.
“FIFA Executive Committee is ordered to transmit the Gibraltar Football Association’s application for FIFA membership to the FIFA Congress,” the sports court said in a statement after its judgment. The court also ordered FIFA to take “all necessary measures to admit the Gibraltar Football Association as a full member of FIFA without delay.”
Gibraltar had won a previous case at the Court of Arbitration for Sport, the Switzerland-based legal body that adjudicates on disputes within the world of sport, in 2013 that cleared the way for it to join UEFA, European football’s governing body. As a result, Gibraltar entered qualification for this summer’s European championships in France. It was drawn into a group with the current world champion, Germany, as well as Poland, Ireland, Scotland and Georgia.
Not surprisingly, Gibraltar’s team of amateur players, most of whom hold full-time jobs in Gibraltar’s police force, customs office or fire service, lost all 10 of its matches, conceding 56 goals while scoring two.
But Gibraltar’s difficulties in joining UEFA and FIFA have been rooted in political controversy rather than any perceived lack of ability. The tiny rock measuring 2.25 square miles, with a population of 30,000, is a British overseas territory located on the Iberian Peninsula, connected to the European mainland by an isthmus near the Spanish city of Cádiz.
It was ceded to the British in the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht and became a strategically important naval base at the mouth of the Mediterranean Sea.
But Spain has always retained a claim on Gibraltar, with tensions between Britain and Spain over its ownership flaring up periodically.
When the issue of Gibraltar’s membership in UEFA was first raised in 2007, Spain’s soccer federation threatened to pull its teams — including Real Madrid and Barcelona — out of European and international competition. That led FIFA to reject Gibraltar’s application for membership on the grounds that its stadium was built on a disputed territory. UEFA later changed its statutes to admit teams only from a United Nations-recognized nation state.
Gibraltar countered that several FIFA members — including Palestine, the Faroe Islands and even England — are not recognized nation states, either, and that it had applied for membership before the rules were changed.
The ruling on Gibraltar is not likely to be the last controversial addition to 2018 World Cup qualification in Europe. Kosovo, which fought a war for independence from Serbia in the late 1990s, also has been pushing for UEFA and FIFA membership.
Kosovo is recognized by a majority of European Union and United Nations members, but official recognition by those bodies and others has been elusive. Instead, Kosovo has sought legitimacy through sport. In 2014, the International Olympic Committee confirmed Kosovo’s membership, meaning it can compete under the Kosovar flag at the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro this summer.
Yet in soccer there has been fierce opposition to Kosovo joining UEFA and FIFA; Serbia views Kosovo as a historical part of its territory, while Russia, a Serbian ally, has vowed to use its United Nations Security Council veto if a vote is ever brought on Kosovo’s recognition.
The former FIFA president Sepp Blatter supported greater recognition for Kosovo, and the territory was granted permission to play friendly matches against other FIFA members in 2014. Its first match was a 0-0 draw against Haiti in the ethnically divided northern Kosovar city of Mitrovica.
UEFA’s congress, which meets in Budapest, will vote on Kosovo’s UEFA membership Tuesday. If that passes, as is likely, FIFA membership for Kosovo could also be confirmed in Mexico.
The moves could set the stage for both Kosovo and Gibraltar to be added to one of UEFA’s nine qualification groups for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. Seven of those groups have six teams, and two have only five. 
