During the 2014 World Cup, Karl Ove Knausgaard wrote this in The New Republic: “Soccer is the antithesis of literature, because the magic spell it casts has no consequences.”
A new book, “Home and Away: Writing the Beautiful Game,” is composed of lengthy letters exchanged between Knausgaard and the Swedish writer Fredrik Ekelund during the 2014 tournament. The two range far enough from the sport to make Knausgaard’s quotidian, ruminative half of the correspondence feel like a tangential volume of his six-part autobiographical novel, “My Struggle.” Here he struggles, among other things, with staying awake during matches (“Even though I had been looking forward to this game for several months, . . . I went out like a light around the 30th minute”); with his work ethic (“I have a constant guilty conscience; . . . it is not good to do nothing at all, just loaf around”); and with his social skills (“I hardly even talk with my neighbors, and if I do it is with the intention of getting away”).
One of the book’s most entertaining elements is the contrast between Ekelund’s lust for life and Knausgaard’s deep crabbiness. (“If I like to read about wild, exuberant, extrovert, high-spirited lifestyles around the world, . . . this is not a world I can inhabit, I can barely stand it.”) In keeping with that philosophy, Knausgaard roots for “traditionally cynical” teams that never do “anything beautiful for the sake of beauty.”
Quotable
“I do see the act of writing about faith as deeply radical in the current intellectual climate. In some ways it’s literary suicide. But that’s the whole point of what I do — to be free you need to be willing to sacrifice everything, to be unafraid.” — Nicola Barker, author of “The Cauliflower,” in an interview with the Los Angeles Review of Books
Word Count
“Scratch,” an anthology of essays and interviews about how writers make money, is intended to be honest, not reassuring. Yiyun Li, the acclaimed author of several books, says that in her family, “Writing doesn’t feed anybody.” The novelist Porochista Khakpour recalls sitting on the grungy floor at Kennedy Airport, overdrawn at her bank and ruing the check she had written not long before to a psychic. Roxane Gay is one of the few who divulge the modest specific numbers (a $12,500 advance for her novel “An Untamed State”; $15,000 for her essay collection “Bad Feminist”). Even the biggest successes have gripes. Susan Orlean describes the tough early stages of running her freelance career, of which she was “both the manager and the product.” (“I ran the widget factory and I was the widget.”) Jonathan Franzen was just getting rich when his Oprah imbroglio occurred and “almost to a man the entire literary community of America turned against me. So I wasn’t entirely clocking the success part.”
