It is easy to see why Formula One’s new owner, the Liberty Media Corporation, asked Ross Brawn to help re-energize and revamp the sport. He is known for his clarity of thought and vision.
Brawn was appointed managing director of motorsports in January, with, he said, his brief “to make the core show as good as possible.”
“Whatever we do around the periphery, the key objective is to make the cars, the drivers and the racing as exciting as possible,” he said.
Brawn of England is highly respected in Formula One. He was technical director of the Benetton team when it won the constructors’ title in 1995 and when Michael Schumacher took the 1994 and 1995 drivers’ championships.
Brawn moved to Ferrari at the end of 1996 and was instrumental as the team won six constructors’ titles from 1999 to 2004 and five drivers’ championships, all with Schumacher, from 2000 to 2004.
He later guided his own team, Brawn GP, to the constructors’ and drivers’ titles in 2009. It was bought out by Mercedes at the end of that year, with Brawn staying on as team principal until the end of 2013 before retiring from Formula One, albeit laying the foundations for the dominance of 2014-16.
Despite offers from other teams since then, Brawn, 62, an avid fisherman, said in an interview “they weren’t enough to pull me off the river.”
But this year, there was “a changing of the guard,” with Colorado-based Liberty taking a stake in Formula One, he said, and he believed that “there was a unique opportunity that was irresistible.”
It was following talks with Chase Carey, who replaced Bernie Ecclestone as chief executive of Formula One Management, that Brawn realized he was being offered a chance to make a fundamental difference to the sport.
“Liberty and Chase didn’t come along and say, ‘This is how we think Formula One should be run,’” Brawn said. “They said, ‘We think there is an opportunity here, and we want you to tell us how you think Formula One should be run and how it should evolve.’”
“They have expertise in media and certain areas, but they don’t have expertise in Formula One,” he said. “They wanted me to bring in the expertise for them. That’s a refreshing approach. It was that simple.”
He said his task was to have a bigger initiative to improve the racing and the type of cars from a fan’s perspective.
“There is too much disparity in performance from front to back,” he said, “and I would say it is still unclear as to how well these cars can race each other.”
“People will point a finger at the aerodynamic characteristics of the cars, and that’s a factor,” he said. “We intend to try and understand that more effectively and find solutions for the future, which will reduce the potential for this performance differential and also create cars that are exciting to look at, exciting to drive and can race each other.”
New regulations were adopted this season. The cars are faster, with more downforce and grip, but after five events, it is still unclear whether the racing has improved.
“Ferrari has managed to take the fight to Mercedes, which is great,” Brawn said. Sebastian Vettel, Ferrari’s top driver, leads the championship over Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes.
“At least we are seeing some close racing at the front, but I think it is a breather,” Brawn said. “There are still core issues in Formula One that we need to try and improve in the medium to long term.”
Brawn is putting together a small team to help him, what he describes as “the third leg of a three-legged stool — with the other two legs being the teams and the F.I.A.,” referring to the International Automobile Federation, the sport’s governing body, by its French acronym. He says it is “to fight our corner for things we feel are needed to improve the show, the racing and make Formula One more sustainable for the future.”
The group comprises specialists in mechanical design, aerodynamic design, sporting regulations, track design and power units.
“We need the best, and you need people doing the best job to win the races,” Brawn said.
“But the resources being devoted to Formula One, at one end of the grid, are so contrasting to the available resource at the other end that I think we have to do things to try and have a narrower spread, without constraining Formula One and dumbing it down. We must not dumb it down.
“It’s the pinnacle of motorsport, it’s technology. By the way, the whole technology side could be much better advanced and promoted within the sport because it’s a fascinating area, and fans will find it very interesting.
“But the technology must not rule the sport, and that’s the bit where we are at the moment, that the technology is ruling the sport. The drivers are the heroes, and we need everyone to believe that Formula One is genuinely the pinnacle of motorsport and creates a magic that doesn’t exist anywhere else.”
Brawn faces a challenge: Teams have been reluctant to embrace change because of self-interest.
“I’m an optimist, and I believe if we have good ideas, well-researched ideas with proper facts, figures, presentation, then we have a much better chance of convincing the teams it’s the right way forward,” Brawn said.
“Inevitably there will be dissenters amongst the group, but if that dissension is because they are trying to maintain a competitive advantage, then we will find a way around it,” he said. “I hope it doesn’t come to that.”
