LIVINGSTON, Mont. — The Yellowstone River, flowing in ribbons beneath the towering Absaroka mountains and through this small town, is usually flecked with drifting boats and rafts, sport fishermen and children jumping off bridges. But now the river, one of Montana’s premier fly-fishing destinations, is empty as wildlife officials and scientists race to contain the spread of a microscopic invader, a parasite that is deadly to fish.
Montana wildlife officials temporarily shut down almost 200 miles of the Yellowstone and its tributaries to recreation last week to prevent the parasite from spreading to other rivers, or south into Yellowstone National Park.
The white bodies of thousands of dead fish litter many parts of the river, victims of a parasite that causes a fatal illness called proliferative kidney disease, or P.K.D., in mountain whitefish. There have been reports that it is also killing trout, the prized game fish here. The outbreak has not spread to humans or other animals.
“The aroma of rotting fish tells you what we’re dealing with,” Travis Horton, a regional fisheries manager for Montana, said Tuesday as he inspected the riverbanks near here.
Outfitters along the river, used to doing a booming business in August, are shuttered. “We put 100 to 150 people a day on the river,” said Marlie Anderson, a partner at Rubber Ducky River Rentals on Livingston’s main street. Last week, however, “our business pretty much ground to a halt,” he said.
“Everybody’s kind of reeling,” said Roger Nelson, who, with his wife, Mary, owns Nelson’s Spring Creek, a half-mile stretch of prime trout stream that flows into the Yellowstone just south of town. Before the closing, he said, as many as 10 fishermen a day paid $120 each to fish on the Nelsons’ property and booked rooms in their lodge.
This parasite is not the first invasive species to disrupt life on the river. “We got through whirling disease and mud snails, and we’ll get through P.K.D.,” Mr. Nelson said.
The closure affects the Yellowstone River from the border of the park to Laurel, Mont., as well as several tributaries, including the Shields and Boulder Rivers. All could remain closed for the rest of the season, officials said.
“The infective load is very high, and it makes it easy to spread to other rivers,” said Eileen Ryce, a fish disease specialist at the state wildlife department.
State officials have used a hot water decontamination system at checkpoints, washing the parasite from every boat that comes through. “It travels on boots, boats, anything and everything,” said Ron Aasheim, a spokesman for the wildlife department. “You just don’t know.”
On Tuesday, Gov. Steve Bullock visited a deserted fishing access point and campground, and spoke about the loss of a large portion of the $20 million in outdoor recreation revenue that the region attracts every year. He urged patience until biologists learn more. “It’s hard to come here and not see anybody on the river,” Mr. Bullock said. “But we’ve got to let science drive this thing.”
Part of the reason for the outbreak is near-record low flows and warm water temperatures, which stress fish, officials said. They hope that once temperatures cool off, the fish will be less stressed and the disease will diminish. But they caution that they have no way to know when the outbreak might end.
Dan Vermillion, the owner of a fishing guide service called Sweetwater Travel (who gave President Obama a fly-fishing lesson in 2009) is chairman of the Montana Fish and Wildlife Commission, which oversees fish and wildlife policy in Montana, and a longtime observer of wildlife here.
Montana rivers are changing because of a warmer climate, Mr. Vermillion said. “I’ve grown up on this river and seen the changes,” he said. “In my opinion, this is the kind of thing we’re going to deal with for a long time.”
The cold, dark water the fish seek during the summer, he said, simply is not there this late in the season any longer. “Low water and high temperatures are what allows this disease to explode,” he said.
And that is bound to affect the town of Livingston, which the river flows through. “It makes the community what it is,” Mr. Vermillion said, “and to see the river sick like this is heartbreaking.”
