It was disclosed this week that two football greats, quarterbacks Ken Stabler and Earl Morrall, were the latest of dozens of players found to have had a degenerative brain disease linked to repeated head hits.
Yet N.F.L. Commissioner Roger Goodell, when peppered with questions about player safety on the Friday before Super Bowl 50, gave one of his most earnest endorsements of the safety of the game.
Most of his comments echoed previous statements: that the league is changing its rules to reduce risks, has adopted new equipment and technology, and is spending millions of dollars on research.
But near the end of a 45-minute question-and-answer session with reporters, Goodell seemed exasperated. When asked whether it was safe for young people to play football, Goodell said that he was glad he was able to play tackle football for nine years before college.
“If I had a son, I’d love to have him play the game of football,” Goodell, a father of two daughters, added. “There’s risk in life. There’s risk in sitting on the couch.”
Goodell’s comments came amid a renewed focus on whether football was too dangerous. By the N.F.L.’s own account, the number of diagnosed concussions rose by 31.6 percent this season over last season. Several former players have posthumously been found to have had the degenerative brain disease chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., including Stabler, Morrall and Tyler Sash, a former Giant who died at 27. At least seven high school football players died last year.
When asked about these statistics, Goodell often focuses on what the N.F.L. is doing to make the game safer. He bristled at the suggestion that more N.F.L. players were retiring because they were worried that extending their careers could increase their risks of brain damage.
“I think each individual player makes his own individual decision about how long they play the game, who they play for, under what conditions they play,” he said in response to a question about players leaving the game at a young age. “These guys love this game, they’re passionate about this game, and if you lose that passion, maybe it is time to move on. That happens in life.”
He said that the reduction in the number of full-contact practices had not affected the quality of play in games, though the changes were disliked by some players.
“Players like to play,” he said. “So limitations on that are not necessarily popular. I get it. But I think the changes that we’ve made with the players’ association now five years ago have been very healthy for the game.”
While Goodell said that player safety was his top priority, he dismissed the possibility of changing the league’s substance abuse policy to allow players to smoke medical marijuana.
The league, however, is working with Major League Baseball and antidoping watchdogs to investigate allegations made in an Al Jazeera report that Denver Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning had used human growth hormone.
“We will work with law enforcement if they’re involved, but we will also continue our own investigations and working proactively with everyone to make sure we’re taking this seriously, that we find out the conclusions,” Goodell said.
Goodell suggested that the league’s hard-nosed approach to player discipline led to a 40 percent decline in the number of players arrested in 2015.
Goodell said he favored tightening discipline on the field as well. He said he would like to see players ejected from a game if they commit two personal fouls, something akin to soccer, in which players who receive two yellow cards must leave the field.
Several of the owners in attendance were circumspect, saying that what constituted a personal foul would have to be clarified.
Goodell did clarify one longstanding question: when the N.F.L. would return to Mexico. He said on Friday that the Oakland Raiders and the Houston Texans would play a “Monday Night Football” game on Nov. 21 in Mexico City, the first game there since 2005.
Goodell said he envisioned a fourth game being played in London at some point, up from three per season now. And he said he favored keeping the Raiders and the San Diego Chargers in their home markets.
