“If you’re cold, you’ll think only of the cold,” says Dmitry Eliseev, Russia’s top ice fisherman and the winner of last year’s World Ice Fishing Championship. You must dress warmly, in layers, and take along a hot, nonalcoholic beverage in an insulated thermos. Before stepping out onto the ice, consider your safety. “Never go alone,” says Eliseev, 25, who has fallen through the ice five times since he took part in his first expedition, as a toddler. Know the ice. Ice is harder when it’s new, clear and blue; avoid ice that appears milky or is covered in snow. Using your auger (you’ll need one), drill a test hole near the shore. Don’t go out unless the ice is at least four inches thick.
Carry two picks — or metal spikes protruding from buoyant handles — securely connected to a cord that is 24 to 30 inches long, in case you need to claw your way out of the freezing water. You’ll also need a rescue rope, an ice-fishing rod (which is shorter than a regular rod) and bait. “Bloodworms work well,” Eliseev says. To save time and energy, use a sonar device to locate fish before settling on a spot.
Begin when the sun rises. “Like us, fish want to eat breakfast,” he says. Carry a portable chair and food if you intend to stay all day. If you’re not having any luck, bore more holes, but keep them far apart unless the ice is at least 10 inches thick. Try to give other anglers some space too, though that won’t always be possible. During Russia’s long winter, frozen lakes can teem with hundreds, sometimes even thousands, of bundled-up men, women and children eager to catch a perch or a common bream. “A crowd is fine if the ice is thick,” Eliseev says.
Eliseev beat 78 competitors from all over the world at last year’s ice-fishing championship on a frozen lake in Latvia. “Don’t think or talk about politics when fishing,” he says, especially at international tournaments. Eliseev believes that Russians are undoubtedly the best but that anglers from former Soviet states like Belarus and Ukraine are highly skilled, too. Even the Americans have improved in recent years: “They’re eager and very friendly.” You can always find a way to get along with fellows anglers, Eliseev says. “Just talk about fish.”
