LOS ANGELES — Mikaela Mayer knew she was better than the high school burnout that she was in danger of becoming.
She had attended four schools in three years, repeatedly getting in trouble for fighting and bad grades. She was a 17-year-old who modeled on occasion with the self-awareness to realize she had no clear direction or future outside the San Fernando Valley.
“All I cared about was my friends, and going out and partying, and being a young, cool teenager,” Mayer said. “I was looking for something, but I had no idea what.”
One summer day, she realized something was calling her to the humble storefront kickboxing gym in an unassuming strip mall down the street from the apartment of her divorced father. Instead of driving past it again, Mayer and a friend went inside.
“I was hungry for success in something at that time, because I wasn’t doing well at anything,” Mayer said. “I was like, ‘I want to be good at something.’ It’s always been inside me. I’ve always had that fire.”
Almost nine years to the day after that wild child learned how to throw her first punch, Mayer will fight at the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, joining the gold medalist Claressa Shields as the only female American boxers in Brazil.
Mayer still does not know why she first decided to punch people after participating in activities as varied as soccer to motocross to snowboarding.
After her first workout, she knew three ways to throw a proper punch. And she liked it.
“I poured all my energy into it,” Mayer said. “It wasn’t ever just a part-time thing for me. From the day I walked into this gym, within two months, all I thought was, ‘I want to be the best female fighter in the world.’”
Mayer took lessons in Muay Thai and kickboxing but focused on boxing after a back injury temporarily stopped her from throwing kicks. When the Olympics added a women’s tournament in 2010, Mayer and her father, Mark, decided to chase medals.
They heard about a boxing scholarship program at Northern Michigan University under the revered amateur coach Al Mitchell, who has taught three United States Olympic teams. Before she had time to think, Mayer had been accepted to the program on Michigan’s Upper Peninsula.
Mayer warmed to her cold new home, and Mitchell developed his first female pupil into a world-class fighter. Her bond with Mitchell and his fiancée became so tight that she had Mitchell’s initials tattooed on her right hand.
“The thing that makes Mikaela different is her commitment,” Mitchell said. “When she walked in here, I broke her down and rebuilt her. She never believed it was too hard, and she never gave up. She has toughness that got her this far, and now it’s getting her all the way to the Olympics.”
Mayer made the Rio team last fall after fending off a ferocious challenge in three qualifying fights from the teenage prodigy Jajaira Gonzalez, a fellow Southern California native with a wealth of junior titles.
“The competition is so much tougher now than it was when I started,” Mayer said. “Back in 2009, if you went to a tournament and even got to have two fights, it was worth the money.”
She wants an Olympic medal, but she also wants her success to bring more attention to women’s boxing. Although she has thought about turning professional, good money is scarce for female fighters outside the octagon — but that only makes Mayer more determined to succeed in Rio.
“I’ve always believed I’d be here, but I also knew that the chances of being here were going to be slim,” Mayer said. “This was my dream before I knew it was possible.”
