Tim Glover, the top javelin thrower in the United States, shrugged off one indignity after another performing one of the less appreciated sports at the Adidas Grand Prix on Randalls Island on Saturday. Forget finishing in seventh place (“it happens”): it was not yet 10 a.m., and the stadium’s mostly containing the parents of 11-year-olds running relay races. But the music was too much.
“They had me throwing to Justin Bieber,” said Glover, a stocky 24-year-old from Normal, Ill., where he lives with his parents. “Are you kidding?”
Glover faced off against his friend Riley Dolezal, a 29-year-old middle school gym teacher in West Fargo, N.D. Ranked third in the country, Dolezal placed fifth on Saturday. Both he and Glover lost to the reigning world champion, Vitezslav Vesely, a 32-year-old from the Czech Republic, who won handily with a throw of 83.62 meters.
Glover and Dolezal are top athletes in a sport that receives little attention in the United States. Few of those watching understood the physics that inform the performances. For example, Riley and Dolezal both use the “Finnish” grip, one of three popular kinds, which involves holding the pole with the thumb and middle finger.
Dolezal arrived at this approach the hard way.
“I used to throw ‘fork,’ and then it split my knuckles apart,” he said, explaining how he used to hold the javelin between his fingers as though he were making a peace sign. He’s happier with his new approach. “It gets more of a spiral,” he said.
It was just one of a series of painful injuries for Dolezal; more recently, he was sidelined after tearing the tendons in his elbow.
The two men had adjusted their routines for their first visit to New York City. Like all javelin throwers, they focus on a site in the distance and throw straight through. On Saturday, Dolezal dotted his hands with the sticky tar he uses for traction and picked one of the high rises dotting the skyline. As he thrust toward it, using his legs for force, the javelin soared through the air.
He knew when he had thrown well. “My best throw today, it just shot out, easy, like I never even threw it,” he said. “It was just gone.”
For Glover, success is the result of an unusually long career. He taught himself to throw the javelin off YouTube videos after he first picked one up at age 10. He competed for Illinois State and now trains several days a week, with a self-coached routine involving a combination of sprints, jumps and medicine-ball throws to help with the agility and core strength a javelin thrower needs. Once he wraps up his training at around 4 p.m., he spends the rest of the day fishing. In the winter, he sells Christmas trees.
His father, who also threw the javelin, and gave him advice that guides his throws.
“He would tell me, ‘Throw your eyeballs out,’ ” said Glover. “And I do. I black out when I throw. As soon as I get on the runway and let go, I don’t remember anything.”
Dolezal, who graduated from North Dakota State in 2009, described a similar experience. “All the pressure builds up and then you just explode,” he said.
After putting on their javelin-throwing shoes — spiked high tops with thick soles — they warmed up with a shared pool of javelin poles, rotating through carbon, steel and aluminum models, which have varying degrees of firmness and flexibility. The poles were a struggle to get to New York.
“I flew here from Fargo on a two-by-two seater plane,” said Dolezal, who brought four different poles with him. “Security always gives me a funny look. I started telling the agents they’re fishing poles.”
Glover has started shipping his to meets ahead of time, not risking them breaking in cargo, as three of his did the last time he flew with them.
Mostly on Saturday they were grateful for the good conditions; rain is fine, but a javelin thrower’s greatest enemy is erratic wind.
“Today it was swirling,” said Glover, who explained that he used to fixate on wind. “I think we were all trying to judge it in warmups, but it was fine. It wasn’t doing anything to the actual javelin.”
It helped them focus.
“You have to stay intense but relaxed,” said Glover. “The moment you tense up, everything shortens up.”
They train heaviest and in the fall and winter, tapering off as they approach the big performances in the summer. With their performances improving, they are looking toward the United States championships on June 25, and then the Olympics in 2016.
Dolezal was pleased to have won some prize money for his performance Saturday. What was he going to do with it?
“I don’t know,” he said, laughing. “Probably buy a new javelin.”
