PARIS — If Sebastian Coe thinks beating Steve Ovett to the finish line or running a successful London Olympics was tough, he is now about to embark on something that looks a great deal more daunting.
Saving track and field — from itself and from eroding global relevance — is the kind of challenge that only a supremely confident, thoroughly committed or genuinely deluded individual would embrace.
But Coe, long considered the golden boy of British sport, is front-and-center now after being elected president of the I.A.A.F., track and field’s world governing body, on Wednesday in Beijing.
“For me this is the pinnacle,” said Coe, who has already scaled quite a few peaks in his 58 years. “It’s my sport. It’s my passion. It’s the thing I always wanted to do.”
Coe, a two-time Olympic gold medalist in the 1500 meters, defeated another track-and-field icon, former Ukrainian pole vaulter Sergey Bubka, 115 votes to 92, with each of the I.A.A.F.’s member federations allowed one vote. Coe will officially take over for outgoing president Lamine Diack on Aug. 31, the day after the world championships in Beijing.
Those championships begin on Saturday in the Bird’s Nest Stadium with the sport mired in its latest and maybe even greatest crisis of confidence amid allegations and investigations of continued and widespread doping.
The opening weekend of the meet has a fine chance of underscoring the issue. In the men’s 100 meters, Usain Bolt, by far the sport’s biggest star, could quite possibly lose to Justin Gatlin, the American sprinter who has twice been banned for doping violations and has recorded the world’s fastest times in the event this season.
Gatlin has served his suspensions and has the right to compete in Beijing, which Coe duly noted at his post-victory news conference on Wednesday, adding that Gatlin should be “accorded all respect wherever he finishes.”
But Gatlin, because of his past, remains one of the many (many) athletes who have contributed to the sport’s decline in credibility and appeal through the decades.
How to care as a spectator when you cannot trust in what you see?
Coe understands all this, of course. Once the world’s premier middle-distance runner, he was still an active athlete in 1988 when Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson tested positive after winning the 100 meters at the Olympics in Seoul: still the biggest scandal in track and field history.
He has been on the I.A.A.F. council since 2003 and a vice president since 2007: the year that American sprinter and long jumper Marion Jones publicly admitted to having taken steroids and lying to federal agents under oath during their investigation into the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative (Balco). Jones returned her five medals from the 2000 Olympics and later served a short prison sentence.
Now comes this latest wave of revelations and allegations. There are ongoing investigations into systematic doping by Russian athletes and continued concern about the scope of doping in traditional track power Kenya.
The German broadcaster ARD and the British newspaper The Sunday Times have released previously confidential results from an I.A.A.F. database and concluded that blood doping is widespread in endurance events: a conclusion the I.A.A.F. has disputed. Meanwhile, the I.A.A.F. confirmed that 28 athletes were found to have committed doping violations after their samples from the 2005 and 2007 world championships were retested with current technology. The I.A.A.F. said none of those athletes would take part in Beijing.
It all makes for quite a minefield for newly elected president Coe. It is not as if he did not have other options. A former conservative member of Parliament in Britain, he could have — after the big success of the 2012 London Olympics — leaped back into British politics. He could have continued to pursue his wide-ranging and occasionally intertwined business interests: some of which (adviser to Nike) he will now have to unravel to avoid conflicts as president. Or he could have, with his 60th birthday approaching, simply rested on his laurels.
Instead he traveled about 700,000 kilometers and shook thousands of hands in the successful campaign to secure one of the most exposed posts in global sports. “This felt like a crossroads for me,” said Ed Warner, chairman of UK Athletics, in comments to BBC radio on Wednesday. “Not that Sergei Bubka wouldn’t have been a good president, but the challenges facing athletics are such that we need a great president right now. And I do believe Seb has the range of skills and the character required to really pull us forward and make sure we remain relevant to the public across the world for decades to come.”
That will be quite the challenge, and it was encouraging on Wednesday to find out that Coe, unlike Diack and some of his predecessors, will not remain in power for decades. The I.A.A.F. congress approved a rule change that limits presidents to 12 years, or three four-year terms.
More changes should be forthcoming, perhaps quickly. Coe has said that he plans to create a doping agency that is independent of the I.A.A.F. to increase efficiency and, above all, credibility.
“There is a zero tolerance to the abuse of doping in my sport,” he said Wednesday. “And I will maintain that to the very highest levels of diligence.”
He has sketched out plans to increase street meets in major cities and to deploy social media in an innovative fashion, as his team did for the London Olympics. He intends to make the sport’s border-crossing Diamond League calendar more legible and find a way to make the stars compete against each other much more frequently: perhaps through new team competitions in which athletes would represent a city instead of their country.
He wants to push his sport in India (and not just because his mother was half-Indian). He wants to revitalize the sport in the United States. (The recent I.A.A.F. decision to award the 2021 world championships to Eugene, Ore. is encouraging.) Coe also — after all his world travels and reconnaissance missions in recent months — wants to devolve power from I.A.A.F. headquarters to regions and individual federations, many of whom lack the latitude and means at the moment to create meaningful change.
“One of the things that was very impressive about Seb’s vision to elevate the sport was how progressive it was,” said Max Siegel, the chief executive officer of USA Track and Field, in a recent interview. “He wants to think differently than anyone has done traditionally, and he does think differently.”
Deep thinking, evident talent, hard toil and a gift for communication and delegation have allowed him to overcome obstacle after obstacle in his career. But the obstacle in front of him now looks much more like the Himalayas than a hurdle.
Off with the spikes. On with the crampons.
