BIARRITZ, France — Flags from Israel, South Korea, China, Sweden, Ireland, Greece and even Afghanistan are flying in the Basque Country seaside wind this week, representing surfers who harbor Olympic dreams.
Often referred to as Europe’s “California of Surfing,” this chic southwestern French resort and its Grande Plage are the setting as nearly 250 surfers from 47 countries compete for individual and team titles at the World Surfing Games.
The number of surfers and countries competing are records for the event, which has roots dating to 1964. Many attribute the surge of new surfing nations to the sport’s acceptance into the 2020 Olympics by the International Olympic Committee in August.
The top-ranked French surfer, Jérémy Florès, a former champion of the event, said the Olympics were “going to show and discover this professional side of our sport, that it’s not just something you do on your holidays.”
“I’ve been watching the Olympics since I was a kid — it’s amazing for our sport,” he added.
Bianca Buitendag of South Africa said, “I cannot express how big this is for us.”
The International Surfing Association’s president, Fernando Aguerre, lobbied the I.O.C. throughout his 23-year reign to get his sport into the Olympics.
“Our Olympic wave took me personally 22 years of paddling — a very long time paddling — but together, we’ve done it and now surfing is both an Olympic and a Pan-American Games sport,” Aguerre, 59, said, addressing surfers at the opening ceremony.
Leandro Usuna of Argentina, a two-time World Surfing Games champion, said surfers had earned their spot in the Olympics.
“We used to be seen like a rebel sport, but now people see how much we train, how much we sacrifice and how disciplined we are,” Usuna said. “Maybe back in the day, it was all rock ’n’ roll, but now if you want to be the best, you have to train like the best. That’s what the sport has come to.”
Olympic inclusion means potential new sponsors, public and private funding, support from national Olympic committees, greater demands and enhanced media exposure. Aguerre says he is not worried that surfing will become too mainstream, sacrificing its culture and its easygoing vibe.
“They say that size is the enemy of cool or that quantity and quality are inversely proportional, so I’m very aware of this,” he said. “My feet are on the sand, and when they’re not on the sand, they’re on the surfboard.”
Tom Curren, a Californian who helped revolutionize surfing in the 1980s with his competitive drive, raw power and smooth, innovative maneuvers, said surfing in the Olympics was only a pipe dream back then.
“It’s been a long time that the surfing community has been knocking on the door and always getting the same answer,” said Curren, a world junior champion in Biarritz in 1980.
“There was even talk about it in 1980 when we were here,” he added. “But surfing has grown to where it includes enough countries and the format of the events is structured enough now, so it’s great to see surfing finally in the Olympics.”
At the Tokyo Games in 2020, 20 male and 20 female surfers will compete for their sport’s first-ever Olympic medals. The qualifying criteria have not yet been determined.
The I.O.C. sports director Kit McConnell made a scouting trip to Biarritz this week, envisioning what the sport’s Olympic debut will encompass.
“It’s really important that we embrace the spirit of the sport,” McConnell said. “We take the Olympic movement to them and they bring the surfing community to us, and we create something special.”
Aguerre talked of creating a festival atmosphere at the Tokyo venue, Tsurigasaki Beach, highlighted by musical acts.
Nicholas Donawa of Barbados, a lifelong surfer with an infectious smile and dreadlocks, called surfing “a tribal sport” that creates friends from all over the world. As if to demonstrate that, Donawa is here coaching a 16-year-old Russian, Nikita Avdeev.
Avdeev says he hopes Donawa will help him become an Olympian.
“I want to go and represent my country for sure,” Avdeev said. “Now, I’m trying to get ready for that.”
Although many premier surfers, including the two-time defending champion Tia Blanco of the United States, skipped the World Surfing Games for a World Surfing League qualifier in Japan, a prestigious team title is at stake as the competition continues through Sunday. France, Brazil and South Africa are among the leading contenders.
The French surfers Pauline Ado, 26, and Johanne Defay, 23, won gold and silver medals in the women’s competition on Monday. They hope there will be medals adorned with the Olympic rings in their future.
“It will be just amazing and like a dream come true,” Ado said. “Surfing is just spreading all around the world. It’s a very exciting time for our sport.”
