FAREWELL TO THE HORSE A Cultural History By Ulrich Raulff Translated by Ruth Ahmedzai Kemp Illustrated. 449 pp. Liveright. $35.
Sometime in the late 20th century, the grand narrative died. For the postmodernist, the fact that unifying impulses and linearity persisted in much of literature — the way fashion trends might linger — was no argument against their needed passing. But now that the death certificate of postmodernism has been signed, and the Lazarus-like resurgence of narrative and emotion announced; now that we live in post-history (or is it post-post-history now?) — and most certainly in an era of post-truth — the question of how to construct histories seems hopelessly convoluted. What form can possibly be authoritative in a climate of theoretical confusion, in a world post-everything? For the most adventurous historian, equal parts erudite and bold, the answer might still be to produce something grand, but nothing so overdetermined as a unifying narrative, so straightforward as a chronological story.
The problem of constructing historical narrative exists uneasily on every page of “Farewell to the Horse,” Ulrich Raulff’s brilliant examination of our complicated and violently unilateral relationship with Equus caballus, a relationship whose decline he tracks over the course of “the long 19th century.” He employs Isaac Babel’s term dehorsification to describe this recession. Given his superabundance of material, Raulff has perhaps chosen for himself an impossible task, even without the wobbly problems presented to contemporary historians. To arrange 125-odd years (foregrounded by a further 6,000 years) of countless phenomena and events into something that coheres for the reader, all while remaining faithful to the chaotic rush of sense-impressions that define human consciousness, is a daunting task to say the least. It must be like wrestling an ocean.
Raulff sets out to manage the problem of form by grouping his material into four broad categories: The first delves into lived histories, examining the use of horses in cities and rural spaces, their ubiquity in human progress, and their decline as a weapon of war; the second section departs more radically from convention as it traces intellectual history, including the horse’s place in libraries, and the rise of studbooks, equine science and research; the third looks at the horse as sign and symbol for death, sexuality, terror and innocence, particularly in literature; and the final section asks "Why the horse?" and considers what we might have left to learn from this creature, which has lived and died in bondage since it was first domesticated.
In truth it’s difficult, even naïve, to summarize the book’s organization, because as we travel deeper and deeper into these remarkable and learned sections, there is an increasing sense of the structure breaking down, of demarcations dissolving, their lack of necessity. This is due largely to the strange and beautiful way in which Raulff handles the problem of historicity and narrative. Through looping, meandering and backtracking discourse, he addresses hundreds of subjects, including philosophy, etymology, anti-Semitism, breeding, the Polish cavalry, lost sound and scent histories, theater. He unpacks 19th-century novels, paintings and monuments, as well as dozens of bleak photographs placed within the text in a manner that recalls the dreaminess of Sebald. He layers fact over myth over military anecdote over personal memory over Darwin over Napoleon over Tolstoy over Gehlen until the book resembles an oil painting of outrageous complexity, so thickly laden with paint that it would take years to scrape down to its blank canvas.
It’s a bold play, a kind of intellectual onslaught. Accordingly, this technique occasionally lacks elegance, so the knowledge presented can appear an aggregation of Raulff’s own erudition. But this is a stingy critique; Raulff mostly succeeds and succeeds remarkably. If thinking is the ability to get from point a to a distant point b, he has within this book proved himself a remarkably nimble, creative thinker a thousand times over. He uses a flair for web-thinking to connect seemingly disparate facts into fresh epiphanies on subjects that we might otherwise find overly familiar, presenting himself less as an authority than as an embodiment of intellectual curiosity. At his best, Raulff constructs not just painterly layers of complementary information but wreaths of interconnected facts. In short order, he is capable of braiding together Degas, the thoroughbred, Cromwell, Francis Galton (Darwin’s cousin), George Stubbs, anatomical theaters and Muybridge, all before securing the wreath to itself with Degas again. Every few pages, he works this magic. Along these circuitous routes, his prose takes air, floating on the sheer joy of investigation and rumination. (His stirring examination of Kafka’s short story “Longing to Be a Red Indian” is alone worth the price of the book.)
The source of this digressive, wending approach and his unwillingness to play by the rules seems, to this reviewer at least, a resistance born of integrity. Humans are obsessive storytellers and mythmakers. Commenting on historical narratives, Raulff writes, “History is written in the indicative mood, but lived and remembered in the optative — the grammatical mood of wishful thinking.” One could even say the optative is the source of the indicative nature of normative histories. As a savvy historian, Raulff refuses to capitulate to simplistic chronological organization and instead relays events without forcing them into artificial sequence. His approach feels unusual on the page, but deeply familiar, even natural, because it mimics the discursive gymnastics of the mind rather than slavishly linear modes that attempt to organize history into overly patterned or logical systems.
The result of this technique is that Raulff’s text is somehow dreamy but not sentimental; labyrinthine but not frustrating. Interestingly, it produces a portrait of pathos without being overtly elegiac, an intention he makes clear at the outset. That difficult work — the work of co-suffering — rightfully belongs to the reader and requires no didacticism or manipulation to aid it along, only the facts: eight million horses dead in World War I, 1.8 million German horses alone in World War II and then the countless dead that litter the trail of human progress, which has slaughtered animal life in impossible numbers, both impossible to tally and almost impossible to feel. But capsule portraits of the dead help unlock our stalled emotions: When Raulff recounts the historian Reinhart Koselleck’s wartime experience of witnessing a horse galloping with half its head blown away, a vision of “fatal despair,” the reader is wrenched out of any possible complacency. The writer’s mind and the reader’s heart meet on the written page, and here is exactly where so much of the power of literature lies. The reader and writer both self-transcend; a seemingly private act, reading counteracts solipsism.
What may be quite obvious now is that though this book is about horses, it is just as much about thinking as a devotional act. It’s a powerful display of one writer’s willingness to train his mind with unusual care on our coexistence with an animal that has unduly borne both our “physical and metaphorical burdens.” Our world needs more writers willing to do work of this kind, work that often produces little hope of money or fame, the reward for which must be the satisfaction of fastening together rich new connections before they are lost forever. Bravo to those unwilling to let history — whatever history is — slip away unnoticed. Bravo to Ulrich Raulff.
