This country is rich with awful things to say about everybody. There’s a slur for you and a slur for me — more than one. And because we’re terrified of dealing with them head on, we’ve made them just as easy to warp and defang. Ask anybody who has played HQ Trivia. HQ is the 12-question smartphone fad that has turned Americans into daily-quiz junkies. And in any given session, a stumper might come along that wipes out a huge number of players. (On Nov. 14, nearly half the players misidentified the proper spelling of “embarrassed.”) These apocalyptic decimations so impress HQ’s host, Scott Rogowsky, that he practically bursts with glee: “Savage question!” he’ll exclaim.
All Rogowsky means is “That one was hard,” but in a hyperbolically ruthless, take-no-prisoners sort of way. That question wasn’t here to make friends! That’s a pretty drastic drift from the original troublesome application of “savage” by “civilized” white people to American Indians and Africans-Americans. Now it’s a mic-dropping macroaggression. “Savage” is a trait that might get you into business school or retweeted 10,000 times. It’s what a kid might say after somebody does something awesome or gnarly or fierce. Oh, that’s savage! It’s the skate park; it’s the high-school cafeteria; it’s the YouTube comments section.
“Savage” doesn’t care about convention, parameters or propriety. In January, Judge Rosemarie Aquilina sentenced the serial molester and former sports physician Larry Nassar to up to 175 years in prison. She ran the weeklong sentencing hearing — during which more than 150 women delivered victim-impact statements directly to Nassar — in a flamboyantly sympathetic and confrontational style. After throwing the book at him, Judge Aquilina said, “I just signed your death warrant,” and a Twitter user noted that Aquilina’s temerity made her “a #Savage.”
In its expanded usage, “savage” glorifies the imagined wildness that the word once sought to quarantine. But the moral corralling persists. During his State of the Union address last month, President Trump saluted the visibly aching parents of two slain teenage girls by equating their killers with the average undocumented immigrant. He said: “Six members of the savage MS-13 gang have been charged with Kayla and Nisa’s murders. Many of these gang members took advantage of glaring loopholes in our laws to enter the country as illegal unaccompanied alien minors — and wound up in Kayla and Nisa’s high school.” You can always count on somebody to take “savage” back to its racial roots.
In sports, a vanquished people have been made promotional symbols for the aspirational ferocity of their vanquishers — on helmets, jerseys and souvenirs, from “menace” to “merch.” Go, warriors. I’ve never seen tens of thousands of Indian tribesmen waving tomahawks in my direction. But I have seen 50,000 Atlanta Braves fans do it — chanting with foam tomahawks — and it’s scary and savage in an altogether more disturbing manner. Had any of those chanters considered who beyond the stadium world would feel that chop? It’s a loaded gesture that to some of us can be received as a threat.
American popular culture has long been marked by an absence of empathy for American Indians. Westerns doubled as a campaign against so-called savages in a way that desensitized us to the savages we’d become. You don’t even need to like these movies for their power as propaganda to work on you. Hollywood’s spell was one anybody could fall under, even little Spokane Indian boys, like the writer Sherman Alexie. In a 1998 Los Angeles Times column, the adult Alexie laid out his own cognitive dissonance, in explaining just how John Ford’s “The Searchers” had ensorcelled him.
“I rooted for John Wayne as he searched for his niece for years and years,” Alexie wrote. “I rooted for John Wayne even though I knew he was going to kill his niece because she had been ‘soiled’ by the Indians. Hell, I rooted for John Wayne because I understood why he wanted to kill his niece. I hated those savage Indians just as much as John Wayne did.” If that’s the effect westerns could have on an American Indian, imagine the pride a white kid might feel in seeing Wayne, in movie after movie, outrun and defeat assorted Indian tribes, who sometimes weren’t even the main villains so much as existential ones, and were typically played by white actors.
That’s really what’s vexing. You are what white American English speakers say you are. The young black and Hispanic men who in 1989 were accused of bludgeoning and raping a white woman in Central Park were dubbed the “wolf pack.” The New York Daily News ran a notorious headline about the victim: “Wolf Pack’s Prey: Female Jogger Near Death After Savage Attack by Roving Gang.” There, “savage” appears to capture the true barbarity of the crime. But alongside the rest of that animalizing language, it winkingly indicts the accused — who were teenagers — not only for being criminals but also for being black. In the media at the time, their blackness was made to seem inextricable from their presumed criminality. (In 2002, all five of their convictions were vacated after a convicted rapist confessed to the attack.)
To the wider world, the case introduced the word “wilding,” an offshoot of “savage” and an atmospheric description that felt more damning. “Episodes of poor, minority youths roaming the streets looking for trouble” is how it’s put in the publisher’s description of Natalie Byfield’s 2014 book “Savage Portrayals: Race, Media and the Central Park Jogger Story.” But “wilding” has always struck me less as a descriptor of behavior and more as a presumptive state of mind, a fever. Whatever ugly force seized the young Salem witches in Arthur Miller’s “The Crucible” had supposedly gripped those boys. (Of course, one person’s wilding would just have been a typical group of teenagers to someone else.)
“Wilding” took advantage of a pre-existing history of the black savage as violently oversexed, particularly when that lust was trained — or when there was fear of its being trained — on white women. There are other “savage” offshoots, like “monster” and “beast,” and they’ve been repurposed, first in black culture, then in American culture at large. When a black person is acting up or showing off, somebody might say she’s “wilin’ out.” In sports, an athlete who really takes it to another level has entered “beast mode,” which happens to be the nickname of the former Seattle Seahawks superstar Marshawn Lynch (he’s with the Oakland Raiders now).
In 2011, on his way to a 67-yard touchdown, Lynch broke as many as eight tackles, rocking the home crowd so powerfully that the energy produced after the play registered on a seismograph. They call it the “beast quake.” Lynch has monetized the nickname (make your calls with Beast Mobile!) and so normalized it that “beast mode” has been applied to any athlete of superhuman caliber, from the white Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski to the Spanish tennis champion Rafael Nadal.
But sportswriters could always find a way to suck the fun out of Lynch’s athleticism. Here’s USA Today’s Michael Shamburger working the vacuum cleaner in 2015: “What else does one think about when they imagine a hard-running tailback other than a beast?” he wrote. “Lynch is just that, a beast on the field, and he can turn it on when his team needs him to.” This might be meant as praise, but Lynch ceases being a man here. He’s equipment.
So there is something striking about black culture’s taking on “savage” as a concept, sapping its dehumanizing intent and allowing enough elasticity to include adventurous joshing and self-aggrandizing threat — from two black men starring in a very popular “Jumanji” reboot whose subtitle is “Welcome to the Jungle” to the romance series “Addicted to Savage: A Hood Love Story,” to the 25-year-old Atlanta rapper Shayaa Bin Abraham-Joseph, who makes grim, chart-topping music as 21 Savage. Rihanna’s 2016 hit “Needed Me” is a master class in coldblooded womanism whose chorus culminates with her singing “Didn’t they tell you that I was a savage?” And yet while all this feels crucial to expanding the parameters of “savage” and detoxifying it, none of the reappropriation transcends the word’s persistent dirtiness.
That old meaning of “savage” is still aimed at its original targets. In late January, the Cleveland Indians became the latest sports team to phase out its notorious Indian logo. His name is, well, Chief Wahoo, a grinning, red-skinned Sambo-esque caricature that has been with the team since the 1940s. The fight to disappear it turned farcical when, in 2008, Cleveland’s ballpark got a new corporate name. Could a team with that logo really play at a place rebranded Progressive Field? It’s a serious watershed that underscores the impossibility of rebranding “savage.” What pleasure is there, really, to be had in a sport played with somebody else’s trauma?
