A basketball scout named Bernard Bowen Jr. was having a look at a promising ballplayer named Marvin Roberts at the St. John’s Recreation Center in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in late February. Mr. Roberts, from Bedford-Stuyvesant, had been a leading scorer at Florida International University, where Isiah Thomas, the N.B.A. star and former Knicks coach, recruited him in 2010. But the player from Brooklyn never got his chance at the N.B.A.
Now Mr. Roberts, 29, was training for a different sport — Fightball, a venture that could be described as street basketball waged in a nightclub, complete with a D.J., a bar and a V.I.P. lounge. Fightball seeks to commercialize one-on-one street basketball, the sport’s rawest form, and repurpose its unregulated intensity for the Instagram era.
Contact is encouraged. During a recent match, a player yanked his opponent’s ankle in the middle of a dunk, causing him to slam to the ground as spectators snapped photos with their phones. After shirt tugs and two-handed shoves, the flagrant gesture was finally called a foul. A $100,000 prize awaits the victor of the three-night tournament, which begins with 16 players. Mr. Roberts would be one of them.
A trainer shoved Mr. Roberts about the court with a large exercise ball as he tried making shots. Mr. Bowen sat in the bleachers. The Atlanta rapper Future played from a portable speaker.
“What’s your street name, Marvin?” Mr. Bowen called out.
“Money Over Fame,” Mr. Roberts shouted.
“No, your other name,” he said.
“Child Abuser,” he called back.
Mr. Bowen explained: “That’s because he’ll abuse men on the court.” Everybody in Fightball has a street name.
The tournament was three days away, and hype had been cultivated through a public relations team, social media and word of mouth. Long lines would appear outside a rented studio on a desolate block in Hell’s Kitchen. Admission was free, but only to those on the guest list. (There was a tournament in 2014, but that was more of a test run. Fightball’s financing comes from Apex Entertainment, which produces sports movies, like the 2014 Disney feature “Million Dollar Arm,” starring Jon Hamm.) Contrasting with Fightball’s slick aesthetic are the players themselves, who are among the best amateurs anywhere.
Mr. Bowen, a well-connected scout who is employed by Fightball to find the players, rattled off their gritty pedigrees: Leandro De Lima was found on the favela courts of Rio de Janeiro; Dusan Bulut, who flew in from Serbia, is ranked the No. 1 three-on-three player in the world; Billy Baptist was cut from the Chicago Bulls summer camp after a short stint; Eric Williams dominates courts in a gang-ridden area of Los Angeles. “It was a war zone,” Mr. Bowen said of visiting him. “We’ve gone to some of the roughest parts to find these people. But that’s who we are — edgy. Fightball is a lifestyle.”
After enduring abuse from the exercise ball, Mr. Roberts sat with Mr. Bowen and wiped himself down with a towel.
“This is a dream come true for me,” Mr. Roberts said. “I still want to make the N.B.A., but there are no politics in Fightball. It’s not about who you know. It’s about talent. Can you put the ball in the hoop?”
Fightball and all of its attendant branding is the conception of two creative directors: Liron Reznik, from Israel, and Jonas Hallberg, who is Swedish. They like wearing black and are basketball fanatics, though they give the impression that they have never dribbled a ball themselves.
Their ambitions extend past establishing a new sport; they envision an entire Fightball universe. The caps sold at tournaments and the posters encouraging Snapchat use and the hashtag “#fightball” are just the start: regular seasons, broadcast rights and contracts for players are all in the works.
Mr. Reznik and Mr. Hallberg find today’s N.B.A. tame compared to what was played a quarter century ago, when fierce players like Dennis Rodman and Charles Barkley captivated the sport, and they see untapped potential in the world’s street courts.
“We want to take all the energy and grit from the courts and put it under the spotlight,” Mr. Hallberg said.
“Not everyone makes the N.B.A., and you need to think of those guys,” said Coltrane Curtis, who runs a creative agency and is a Fightball investor.
Mr. Curtis referred to the success of the Ultimate Fighting Championship and such mixed-martial-arts spectacles. “We’re quite complementary,” he said. “This could be the M.M.A. of basketball in five years.”
Mr. Bowen, who has seen all kinds of promising players in his time as a scout, said that reaching the N.B.A. required more than court dominance. “There are great street ballers that might have had the direction of a Russell Westbrook,” he said, referring to the explosive Oklahoma City point guard. “But they made mistakes, had no direction, or didn’t have the same resources, so they end up playing pickup ball. But we want those players. They can play.”
Dana Mazes, who sat courtside on the tournament’s first night rooting for a small but lethal player who was a star at St. John’s University, was more direct. “On TV, that’s not real basketball,” she said. “All you need now are cornrows, being tall, and good management. There are players in jail out there better than those in the N.B.A. Fightball is as close to street ball as you can get. This is like what we see in our ’hood during the summer.”
On the championship night of Fightball in early March, Mr. Roberts, who won $10,000 on the first night, lost his match and was out of the tournament. A video crew was on hand, documenting every dunk and lingering on the spectators packed around the court. The cameraman followed Mr. Roberts to a sparse locker room, pulling in close on his anguish. These videos, uploaded afterward in a nearby “content room,” were produced in grainy black and white — the signature look of Fightball’s promotional media. This includes the monochrome films that play before matches detailing each player’s aspirational tale against a hip-hop beat.
The dramatic narratives of the players are all part of the Fightball image.
“There is an element of redemption,” Mr. Hallberg said. “The second chance. The chip on the shoulder in the court.”
“We like to talk about Fightball like ‘Rocky,’” he added. “Eight minutes of action and 90 minutes of story.”

The championship round came down to two players: Andrew “SpongeBob” Washington, 32, from Washington and Mr. De Lima, the street baller from Rio de Janeiro, who is also 32.
The studio was dark and thumping with hip-hop. A D.J. played Fightball’s slick theme track. The rapper Pusha T played a set. The players finally emerged around midnight. “I hope you came for the money,” goaded an M.C., clad in black, as the men battled for hoops.
“A hundred K is on the line, and they’re going to go to war for it,” he barked.
After a close last round, Mr. Washington, who is covered in tattoos, was victorious. He fell to his knees and pounded his fists against the court. When he got up, visibly emotional, he was asked to say something.
“We’re out of the ’hood forever now,” he cried, embracing friends who had rushed the court. “We’re out of the ’hood forever. I got a hundred grand now.”
After the match, when the space had cleared and Fightball’s social media team prepared for a long night of producing content to be uploaded the next day, Mr. Washington considered his future. “I was homeless before this,” he said, looking relieved. “I’m going to buy a condo for me and my mother now.”
Mr. Washington’s face was contorted into an intimidating grimace throughout the tournament, but he was now almost smiling.
“This game is elevating my whole family out of a situation,” he said. “I needed this money more than the world.”
