SCHENECTADY, N.Y. — It began, as so many eyebrow-raising stories do, with a tale about a fish.
Julian Canavan caught the fish in mid-July, shortly after finishing his shift as a lifeguard at a municipal pool that sits beside a lake here stocked mostly with sunfish. They are saucer-size specimens of a cheerful lemon yellow hue that people call sunnies in a manner suggesting they know each one personally. Yet the creature bending his rod was not a neighborly sunny, but a 37-inch behemoth with teeth to match its fearsome name: an alligator gar, a variant with a snouty, coelacanth look native to Mississippi.
“It looks like a dinosaur, a prehistoric predator,” Mr. Canavan, 20, said. His hunch that it wasn’t supposed to be in Iroquois Lake, in the center of the perhaps aspirationally named Central Park, clashed with his catch-and-release credo. He let the creature thrashing at the end of his line go. “Let it swim another day,” he said.
But just as all fish stories bulge and warp over time, the tale of Mr. Canavan’s strange catch has since morphed into an epic. Along the way, it has hooked the imaginations of this industrial, upstate city of slightly over 65,000.
Before Mr. Canavan freed the gar on July 17, he took a photograph of the fish that was some 1,200 miles away from its natural habitat to post on social media. His mother, who works at Union College here, shared the image on Facebook. A professor at the college spotted it and contacted the United States Geological Survey, which notified the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, according to Mr. Canavan.
Agents from the department happened to be in the area, and knew right away that the gar should not be in the lake, said Chris VanMaaren, the agency’s fisheries manager for the region. Mr. VanMaaren believes it may have been an aquarium pet, dumped into the water after growing too large. But in liberating it, its owner introduced an invasive species, an apex predator with a taste for sunfish that could harm the local ecosystem. Parkgoers also worried that it could take off a toe, though this seems more urban lore than anything based on scientific fact.
So on July 27, two environmental protection agents plied a johnboat through the lake’s waters in search of the gar. The flat-bottomed vessel was equipped with a device that sends out an electrical pulse designed to stun, not kill, fish. But after hours of work — as seems to be the way with mysterious aquatic sightings the world over — the long, thin gar was nowhere to be found among the stunned sunfish the agents collected, all of which were briskly revived and released. “They don’t receive the electricity as well as a shorter, fatter fish,” Mr. VanMaaren said. “They are typically hard to corner, so to speak.”
With just one gar on the loose, and unlikely to survive an upstate winter, the agency had no plans to try again, Mr. VanMaaren said. (If the gar was caught, it would most likely be preserved in ethanol and exhibited at the New York State Museum in Albany, according to state officials. Adoption would be considered, however, if there were appropriate offers.)
Enter the mayor of Schenectady, Gary McCarthy. He decided to take things into his own hands and pockets, offering a $100 reward from his wallet to anyone who caught the gar. “It’s been elusive,” Mr. McCarthy said.
Enter the townspeople. Since Mr. McCarthy’s offer, the park, moribund even on an August day, according to residents, has been packed. Its shoreline bristles with anglers of all ages. At Goldstock’s Sporting Goods, in nearby Scotia, weekly sales of rods have quintupled to 25 a week. “I love it, are you kidding?” an owner, Mike Kausch, 61, said, referring to the gar. “I should put one out there every couple days!”
The fishermen and women seem driven by their own dreams. Liam Berry, 9, said he would use his winnings to take his family on a trip. He was disappointed to learn that gars prefer raw chicken and bacon over the three dozen lures he brought. Nearby, his competition, David Bryk, also 9, was fishing to finance his dream pet — a frog. Its name? “Carlos, of course.”
Other people sat on the benches around the lake and quietly rooted for the gar. “It’s not given fair odds in a little rinky-dink hole like this,” Lisa Monfils, 46, said as her son, Alex Rossler, 12, reeled in yet another sunny in his search for the gar.
As the hot summer weeks have wound on, a strange new twist has emerged from the pond: How is it possible, with scores of fishers dangling gar favorites like chicken livers and crispy baitfish at all hours of the day, that sunfish keep falling for the lure, but the gar has eluded what seems to be an entire town?
Sitting in his rocking chair at Wiggly Worm Bait and Fishing Supply, in Ballston Lake, a few miles away, William Ingles, the shop’s 92-year-old founder, had a theory: “You say, ‘Wait a minute. All of a sudden we got 30, 40, 50 ones out there trying to catch this fish, and all of a sudden nobody’s catching it?’” Perhaps, he mused, the gar was already gone. “What would you do if someone caught the fish, and ate the fish, and everyone’s still out there fishing?”
Near him a foot-thick encyclopedia of fish sat open to the entry for alligator gar (lepisosteus spatula), prepared for the daily onslaught of customer questions. (“The alligator gar has been under siege for much of the 20th century,” the entry reads, under the “ill advised notion of ridding the water of gamefish-killing monsters.”)
As another week of the alligator gar’s continued evasion loomed, the fish tale came full circle. Mr. Canavan said on Friday night that he was at Iroquois Lake that afternoon when a man caught the fish. “My leader was hanging from its mouth,” he said. That is how he knew it was the same fish.
Efforts to reach the mayor about the reward late on Friday were unsuccessful.
