HALLANDALE BEACH, Fla. — As racing prepared for a widely expected coronation of American Pharoah, the first Triple Crown winner in 37 years, as its horse of the year during ceremonies at Gulfstream Park on Saturday night, the industry recognized the need to build on the enormous lift he provided.
In becoming the first to sweep the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes in the spring and the $5 million Breeders’ Cup Classic in the fall, American Pharoah delivered much-needed exposure in traditional and social media. His retirement from racing after the Classic to send him to the breeding shed created the challenge of retaining the interest of young fans drawn to the 12th Triple Crown champion.
“There is a big hole to fill,” said Keith Chamblin, chief operating officer of the National Thoroughbred Racing Association, which promotes the sport. “I think the industry realizes we do have an opportunity to capitalize on the momentum of the past year. There will be a number of initiatives through the Triple Crown and the Breeders’ Cup to capitalize on the renewed interest.”
American Pharoah’s impact was profound. NBC drew its highest rating for a Breeders’ Cup telecast in 20 years. In a major sale of horses at Keeneland Race Course in Lexington, Ky., in November, gross sales reached $218,959,400, an increase of 6.34 percent compared with 2014. Twenty-two racing prospects sold for seven figures, reflecting the degree to which American Pharoah, the first Triple Crown winner since Affirmed in 1978, fired the imagination of owners.
Bill Thomason, president of Keeneland Race Course, is convinced racing can sustain the momentum.
“It does not have to be fleeting, absolutely not,” he said. “Instead of ‘American Pharoah’s gone, he’s gone to the breeding shed and he’s into his new career,’ the excitement that has been created inside the industry has got to be, ‘All right, who’s next?’ ”
The answer could be Nyquist, undefeated through five races in a 2-year-old season that culminated in a Breeders’ Cup Juvenile victory. When Doug O’Neill, his West Coast-based trainer, was asked whether Nyquist possessed Triple Crown potential, he replied: “Oh, yeah. I think about it every day.”
With that lofty goal, he plans to limit Nyquist to two Derby prep races, the Grade II San Vicente Stakes on Feb. 15 at Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif., and the Grade I Florida Derby on April 2 at Gulfstream Park.
“With two preps, in an ideal world, you should have a horse with a lot of energy to handle that challenge of three races in five weeks,” O’Neill said, referring to the Triple Crown.
Speaking of Nyquist’s development, O’Neill added: “He’s undefeated because of how great he is. But I think there is more to come as he gets more comfortable with relaxing early in races and saving his energy for the last part.”
Those working most closely with Nyquist — O’Neill, the owner Paul Reddam and the jockey Mario Gutierrez — offer insight into the Triple Crown. They played the same roles when I’ll Have Another won the first two legs in 2012. A career-ending injury forced him to be scratched on the eve of the Belmont Stakes.
Great horses often have a way of traveling that is almost ethereal. O’Neill sees that in Nyquist, a son of Uncle Mo, a blazing 2-year-old champion. “On a daily basis, I get goose bumps when I am down on the rail and watch him and listen to him gallop by,” he said. “He’s a Ferrari.”
Bob Baffert, a Hall of Fame trainer who conditioned American Pharoah, believes he may have a worthy successor in his barn in Mor Spirit, who closed an auspicious 2-year-old season by taking the Los Alamitos Futurity. Mor Spirit is to make his 3-year-old debut in the Robert B. Lewis Stakes on Feb. 6 at Santa Anita.
“He looks like a Derby horse,” Baffert said. “He’s maturing; he’s getting better every day.”
For Victor Espinoza, American Pharoah’s jockey, the spotlight will continue to shine. He guided California Chrome, the 2014 horse of the year, to a triumphant return recently in the San Pasqual Stakes after a nine-month layoff. If the 5-year-old California-bred Chrome can continue his comeback by taking the $10 million Dubai World Cup on March 26, his followers, who call themselves “chromies,” are likely to increase.
Then there is Beholder, a brilliant mare who became the first female to defeat males in the Pacific Classic at Del Mar last August. If all goes well, she will attempt to join Zenyatta (2009) as the only females to capture the Breeders’ Cup Classic.
Richard Mandella, who trains Beholder, is confident various stars will take the torch from American Pharoah while fans eagerly await his offspring.
“There are always going to be different players,” he said. “Babe Ruth didn’t last forever.”
