This article originally appeared in The New York Times on July 19, 1987.
In boxing more than in other sports, life is seldom easy for the great ones after they climb down from the ring for the last time. But for three of the best, Champagne turned to vinegar. Joe Louis couldn’t knock out the Internal Revenue Service auditors. Sugar Ray Robinson has been struggling with Alzheimer’s disease, and Muhammad Ali is up against Parkinson’s.
The irony is that, as youngsters growing up on the Detroit streets, Joe Louis inspired the original Sugar Ray, whose skill and style later inspired Ali.
It’s almost as if a lineal curse has hounded Ali, a curse perhaps now hovering over a boxer whom Ali has inspired.
During an appearance at a boxing medical symposium in Mexico City last week, Ali explored the possibility of undergoing brain surgery there to alleviate the affliction that has dulled one of the world’s quickest minds. But when Ali’s new wife, Lonnie, and his mother learned that the adrenal transplant procedure was still experimental, they objected, loudly and tearfully. “Don’t be a guinea pig,” they pleaded. Ali agreed. But he had brightened at having his name in headlines again, and of receiving so many messages of concern in phone calls and telegrams.
“I’m shakin’ up the world again,” he said, laughing.
For a few hours, Muhammad Ali was Muhammad Ali again. But now he has drifted back into his daze. As sad as Ali’s condition is, his personal physician, Dr. Dennis Cope, the director of general internal medicine at the U.C.L.A. Medical Center, contends that there’s no reason now for the 45-year-old three-time heavyweight champion to consider the brain surgery performed by Dr. Ignacio Madrazo of the La Raza Medical Center in Mexico City.
“It’s still experimental,” said Dr. Cope, who has discussed the operation with Dr. Madrazo. “Of the 18 people who have had the operation, two have died. And there’s a risk of damage to the brain. The surgery should be reserved for someone whose condition is deteriorating, but there’s no evidence that Muhammad is deteriorating. I think he’s very stable. He’s able to function independently. His symptoms are quite mild.” One of Ali’s problems is that he ignores his doctor’s advice. He doesn’t watch his diet. He doesn’t get enough exercise. And he doesn’t always take his medication. But that’s Ali, who as a boxer always preferred to do things his way. And in the ring, his way almost always turned out to be the best way.
Out of the ring, Ali’s genius has deserted him. Just as Sugar Ray Robinson’s genius has departed. He’s 66 years old now, living in Los Angeles with his wife, Millie, in an upstairs apartment in a nice neighborhood with lawns and small palm trees. When visitors arrive, Millie prompts him. He brightens and addresses his visitors by name. Then he slides into the stupor of the disease that has blanked his memory.
“I don’t blame boxing,” Millie says. “Rita Hayworth had Alzheimer’s, she wasn’t a boxer. Two of my girlfriends have it, they weren’t boxers.”
As a youngster christened Walker Smith Jr., he sometimes carried the gym bag of his Detroit neighborhood hero, Joe Louis Barrow, to the Brewster Center, where each first boxed. When his family moved to New York, he grew into a “sweet as sugar” welterweight champion and a five-time middleweight champion. He is still described by many historians as “pound for pound” the best boxer ever.
“You are the king, my master, my idol,” a teenager named Cassius Clay blurted outside Sugar Ray’s nightclub in Harlem in 1960. “After I win a gold medal in the Rome Olympics, I want you to be my manager.”
Although never his manager, Sugar Ray remained the idol of the heavyweight who would change his name to Muhammad Ali; who often called himself “a big Sugar Ray.”
One night before the Alzheimer’s began winning the struggle, Sugar Ray was having dinner in a Los Angeles restaurant when Phil Rosenthal, a publisher and advertising executive, was introduced to him. Since that evening Rosenthal has emerged as Sugar Ray’s benefactor.
“What,” somebody once asked Rosenthal, “are you looking to make out of this?”
“To make myself feel good,” Rosenthal said. “That’s all I want out of this.”
To create income for Sugar Ray, he produced 1,000 color 26-by-39-inch prints for $250 each, autographed by Sugar Ray, of a Bernie Fuchs oil painting of Sugar Ray in the ring in his prime. Half the supply remains at Sugar Prints, 10433 Wilshire Blvd., Los Angeles, Calif. 90024. Rosenthal now is negotiating the film rights to Sugar Ray’s life.
“What do you want out of the movie?” somebody asked him.
“Give me a walk-on part,” Rosenthal said. “That’s all.”
In his last years, Joe Louis also needed a benefactor. He was a greeter at Caesars Palace, where a bigger-than-life statue of him adorns the lobby elevator area in the new tower of the Las Vegas hotel. Before the heavyweight champion died, Muhammad Ali enjoyed teasing him.
“I’m the greatest,” Ali would say. “I would’ve knocked you out easy.” “If you even dreamed it,” Louis would reply with a smile, “you’d apologize.”
When the aging Joe Louis was knocked through the Madison Square Garden ropes by Rocky Marciano in 1951, Sugar Ray was one of the first to rush to the apron of the ring.
“You’ll be all right, man,” Sugar Ray said. “You’ll be all right.”
That’s what people keep saying now to Sugar Ray Robinson and to Muhammad Ali. But neither will ever be all right. Once Champagne turns to vinegar, it’s never Champagne again.
