Writers, monks and artists have toiled away in the nighttime for centuries. Now, surfers are increasingly taking to the moonlit skies to do their thing, for the solitude and the less-crowded waves.
What do you like to do more by night than during the day?
In “It’s a Nice Night for Surfing. Beware of Sharks,” Jared Whitlock writes:
The ocean and the sky melted together in a gray mass, making it tough for the surfer to size up the coming waves. Would they crash down on top of him and hold him under — or break in just the right spot for him to catch the perfect ride?
By day, the surfer, Helmut Igel, is not fazed by six-foot waves. But it was after midnight, on a moonless sea. Surfing is not the same in darkness.
Igel, 55, is among a small subculture of surfers dotting coastlines from San Diego to Sydney after sunset, a popular adventure these days thanks to social media and LED surfboards. Visibility is but one of the perils.
Sharks, while rare along the coast here, can hunt at night. And surfers cannot count on being rescued by lifeguards; they left hours ago.
So why paddle out under the stars? Elbow room, mainly.
“These days on a full moon, you can still paddle out to a crowd. On other nights, it’s like stepping into a time in California pre-‘Gidget,’” said Igel, referring to the 1959 movie about a teenage girl’s infatuation with surf culture that helped kick-start a boom in the sport.
Estimates of the number of surfers worldwide vary greatly — the International Surfing Association says it is 35 million — but forecasts indicate that the sport is growing. More surfers means more traffic on the water as they wait for waves, continually battling for position, given that the surfer closest to the curl gets the wave. Crowding also strains surf etiquette, which calls for only one rider per wave (or two on a two-way peak).
Students: Read the entire article, then tell us:
— What are your impressions about surfers who brave sharks, low visibility and lack of lifeguard support to pursue their passion after sunset? Is there anything you love to do so much that you would lose sleep for it? What is it, and why?
— What work, sport or recreational activity do you like to do at night? Would it require any risks or sacrifice on your part? Why or why not?
— What sort of special equipment or adaptations would your nighttime activity require? Are these available now, or could they be invented? Why or why not?
Students 13 and older are invited to comment. All comments are moderated by the Learning Network staff, but please keep in mind that once your comment is accepted, it will be made public.
