BEIJING —  In less troubled times, the eve of the world track and field championships would have been all about the return of Usain Bolt and his sport to the Bird’s Nest.
Seven years after the Beijing Olympics, where Bolt became a global star, the avant-garde stadium that was the Games’ centerpiece remains quite a sight and quite a magnet. It draws tourists daily, and on Friday some volunteers and officials took turns gawking and sprinting on the track in their street clothes. A few posed for photographs on the finish line in Lane 4 — in which Bolt broke the world record in the 100 meters on his way to three gold medals in 2008. But the talk entering the meet has hardly been about mere races.
“All I’ve been hearing is just doping, doping, doping,” Bolt lamented at a news conference.
The doping drumbeat is hardly new in track and field, but it is back to deafening levels amid recent allegations of widespread doping by Russian and Kenyan athletes and reports of suspicious blood values recorded by many leading athletes in endurance events in the 2000s.
The sport’s governing body, the International Association of Athletics Federations, has emphasized that those blood values — which came from a leaked I.A.A.F. database — are not proof of doping and that they predate the introduction of the biological passport. The federation also maintained that there had been no intent to cover up results: The departing I.A.A.F. president, Lamine Diack, speaking Friday at a Beijing news conference with the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, said such accusations were not worthy of a response.
What is clear is that 28 athletes who competed in the 2005 and 2007 world championships recently tested positive for banned substances after retesting done by the I.A.A.F. with updated technology. The federation has not named the athletes, citing the legal process, but it has said that all of those still active have been provisionally suspended.
What is also clear is that the Turkish runner Asli Cakir Alptekin, who won the women’s 1,500 meters at the 2012 Olympics, has been stripped of her gold medal and barred for eight years because of blood-sample abnormalities. That decision was announced only Monday, after a lengthy adjudication process.
Jenny Simpson, an American runner who was a surprise winner in the 1,500 at the 2011 world championships in Daegu, South Korea, was asked Friday if she could feel confident when she stepped onto the track for the 1,500 in Beijing that “the field is getting more level for clean athletes.”
“I remember arriving in Daegu and every athlete being drug-tested, and I remember being really excited to see that development in our sport,” she said. “Deep in my heart I believe that’s why I was successful there in 2011.”
But she said her experience at the 2012 Olympics, where she failed to qualify for the final, had made her an even stronger advocate for testing.
“I believe what we’re seeing now is a demonstration of a really unfortunate thing where people in the final kept clean athletes like myself from reaching the final,” she said. “Those sorts of situations are really unfortunate to see in our sport. But today my job as an athlete is to train and to be prepared to the best of my ability, and I certainly support and encourage the governing bodies in charge of regulating athletes to really step it up and help catch people.”
Simpson spoke at a news conference with leading members of the United States team, including the sprinter Allyson Felix, the triple jumper Christian Taylor and the hurdler David Oliver. The group did not include Justin Gatlin, the American who has recorded the world’s fastest times in the men’s 100 and 200 meters this season and whose form casts serious doubt on Bolt’s ability to continue dominating at big events.
Gatlin, barred twice for doping violations, remains a polarizing figure in the sport, and a victory here over Bolt would further complicate the debate and harden the divisions. But the American athletes who spoke Friday defended his right to compete.
“Regardless of my personal feelings, there are rules,” Simpson said. “And I believe strongly in rules and in a process of amending those rules, so if somebody is competing within the rules, I think we should respect the rules as they stand. And if people feel differently about the rules, go about changing them.”
Oliver said Gatlin was “just doing his job.”
“I’m happy for him,” Oliver added, before addressing the assembled news media. “You all just keep bringing it up over and over and focusing on that.”
Gatlin missed the last big meet in the Bird’s Nest; he was serving his second doping ban when Bolt dominated the 2008 Beijing Games.
Those Games were intended to be China’s coming-out party, a spare-no-expense national flexing of the muscles. The sporting community went away duly impressed by the pageantry and the architecture but utterly stumped about what might come next.
Who would have guessed then that seven years later, steamy, flat-as-a-rice-cake Beijing would win the right to host the Winter Olympics in 2022?
In track and field terms, China has hardly taken its first Olympic opportunity and run with it. Liu Xiang, the nation’s popular hurdler, injured an Achilles’ tendon in a heat in 2008 and never got to run for gold in Beijing. Seven years later, the country has no track-and-field star of Liu’s luminosity.
“I do think they have many more athletes in more events now, though,” said Vin Lananna, the American who will coach the United States team at the Rio Olympics next summer and who was a key figure in obtaining the 2021 world championships for Eugene, Ore. “But in terms of building interest here, it almost would have been better for China to get this event first and then the Summer Olympics second.”
This meet could indeed feel like a comedown, particularly if the organizers struggle to fill the 80,000-seat stadium. In truth, the arena, whose official name is the National Stadium, has been used sparingly since the Games: a soccer match here, a Korean pop artist or opera performance there. Even though it will get heavy use over the next nine days (and nights) at the most significant track meet outside the Olympics, the Chinese authorities seem much more interested in another future Beijing event: the military parade on Sept. 3 to commemorate the 70th anniversary of victory in World War II.
But Bolt, who turned 29 on Friday, will still turn heads when the opening rounds of the men’s 100 begin Saturday, even if he has not been the focus leading to the meet.
Like some of the American athletes, Allen Johnson, a former world and Olympic champion hurdler who is in Beijing as an ambassador for the I.A.A.F., made an impassioned defense of track and field, citing the fact that some of its biggest stars — Ben Johnson, Marion Jones and Gatlin — have been barred through the years.
“It shows that this sport right here doesn’t care who you are,” he said. “If you don’t follow the rules, they’ll take you down. So why are we getting torn down as a sport for that? Do you think other sports would take some of their biggest stars and let you guys know that they did something very wrong? No. Track and field does, but since track and field does that, we get torn down.”
Having offered his defense of his sport, Johnson headed out of the room, down the long corridor and onto the track, where he took a panoramic video of himself inside the Bird’s Nest with his smartphone.
“My first time here,” he said. “Quite a place.”
