Don’t rain on my parade? Don’t ask for the impossible. The forecast for today calls for two things: Showers and runway shows. Skip the suede boots and pack the umbrellas. Through inclement weather, New York Fashion Week soldiers on.
THE MORNING SHIFT
Tuesday front-loads a lot of big names of the New York season, packing in plenty of big-ticket shows before midday. Tory Burch kicks it off at 9 a.m. at Lincoln Center, a reminder of fashion week’s headquarters of yore. (The official venues have moved farther downtown, but Ms. Burch is nothing if not an uptown gal.) Vera Wang follows at 11 a.m., hot off a good night at the Grammys: The brand dressed Serayah McNeill of “Empire.” At noon, the Mulleavy sisters of Rodarte will usher the crowd into lunch (that is to say, juice in the back of an S.U.V.).
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
The afternoon turns the focus to some of fashion week’s newer entrants. The fledgling, gender-agnostic Gypsy Sport shows at 2 p.m.; the line is still in its early days, but it got a major lift last fall when it picked up a CFDA/Vogue Fashion Fund award. A.P.C., the unfussy French sportswear label, trades Paris for New York this season, showing from 2 to 4 p.m. both its namesake line and it gym-friendly duds from Outdoor Voices, the line it recently invested in. From there, head on to Coach, a longstanding brand with a new-standing show: Its executive creative director, Stuart Vevers, pulled out all the stops last season for his first runway show, staged on the High Line, and he looks likely to follow it with a similar-scale production.
EVENING STANDARDS
Is it a coincidence that in the evening come the masters of eveningwear? Only the Fashion Calendar’s schedulers know for sure. Suffice it to say that as the sun goes down, a troika of New York’s established and emerging designers take to the stage, united by their dab hands at eveningwear. The charity-gala circuit would grind to a halt without gowns by Oscar de la Renta, now under the direction of Peter Copping, whose latest show is at 6:30 p.m. Next up is Narciso Rodriguez, a celebrity favorite for the red-carpet and late-night talk-show circuit. (Recent Rodriguettes: Alicia Vikander, Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Amanda Peet and Alison Brie.) Last but not least, Brandon Maxwell holds the final show of the day at 9 p.m. It’s worth staying up for — if only for the chance to clap alongside Lady Gaga, Mr. Maxwell’s most famous client and devoted fan.
