Let me tell you about the Kentucky Derby, one of the longest and most pleasurable days in journalism — modern or otherwise — which I’ve been fortunate to cover now for 17 of the past 18 years. (My sole miss, in 2013, was because of my son’s first communion. Apparently the Vatican is not aware that something else very important occurs down here in the Commonwealth on the first Saturday of each May.)
The Derby is a day of pomp and ceremony marbled with a touch of “decadence and depravity,” as witnessed by Hunter S. Thompson with the help of some pharmacology. It is one of the few days of the year when I wear a sports coat. It’s the only day of the year when I ask and answer, hundreds of times: “Who do you like?”
See, fashion is important at America’s greatest race: To drink a mint julep requires a hat for the women and a pocket square for the men. And so are opinions. Unlike political gamblers, horse players want to be talked out of their selections or tipped to a better horse. They want to make their bank accounts great again.
Steam, as information is known in racetrack parlance, has been trafficked for weeks heading into the Derby. In the mornings, clockers clutch stopwatches and time the jogs, gallops and breezes of horses, then break them down like Talmudic scholars.
Trainers and owners are interrogated about the condition of their horses’ health after taxing workouts. They are an unbreakable bunch. “He ate up and emptied his feed bucket” is a folksier way of saying, “No comment.”
But on race day, steam reaches singing temperatures.
“Secretariat spiked a fever!”
“Someone saw Doc Dolittle head into American Pharoah’s barn with an X-ray machine!”
Beyond remaining stalwart in your opinion on who’s going to win the “greatest two minutes in sport,” pacing yourself is of utmost importance. Although the race itself is a mere mile and a quarter, the Derby is a marathon rather than a sprint for its human participants.
When you are finely dressed, surrounded by 150,000 of your closest friends and awash in alcohol, reaching the 6:34 p.m. post time becomes a challenge for many. Eleven races precede the Derby, and there’s nothing sadder than seeing a couple who started the day looking like a young Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip barely conscious and being carried out by security before 3 p.m. (It happens. A lot.)
Reporting on the Derby — 99 percent buildup, with the main event over before you can blink — requires similar pacing. My guess is that it’s not much different from how political reporters do their jobs — except with more whiskey, betting windows and horse manure to cover.
My interest in thoroughbred racing dates back 40 years. I’ve invested in horses two-minutes at a time as well as owned them outright. I’ve been in breeding sheds and watched them foaled. I’ve visited more than 120 racetracks in nine countries. I’ve watched the sport evolve from the “Sport of Kings” to Everyman syndicates where four, 10 or 20 people throw in a few bucks for a piece of a horse in chase of a big dream. Synthetic tracks have come and gone. So have the multimillion-dollar bidding wars at auctions between the sheikhs of the Mideast and the well-heeled lads from Ireland.
I know folks at all levels of the sport — former American ambassadors turned breeders, hard-knocking jockeys who crack a beer at the end of the day and gamblers whose wisdom and language would make Damon Runyon blush. I talk with them as frequently as I can. I lean on a base of knowledge that was expensively developed.
So I enjoy the buildup to the Derby by roaming the grandstands and clubhouse, talking to my sources and the horseplayers and horse lovers I’ve had the privilege of befriending over the years.
I smile a lot because this is my work.
When the gates open, I watch like everyone else as the 20-horse field stampedes around the oval. I let the roar and exhortations wash over me. I get into it. By the time one of them crosses first, I hope I have a story line and emotion — something in my notebook — that can anchor a tale.
The first deadline is in 45 minutes. I sit down and let it rip. I don’t answer my phone or look at my email because I know the desk needs it now.
I pray I don’t embarrass myself.
