MORE than most automotive brands, Land Rover navigates a narrow trail. While Audi, BMW and Mercedes sell a menagerie of sedans, convertibles, coupes and crossovers, Land Rover offers one thing: capable sport utility vehicles. Even the urbane Evoque has mountain goat DNA.
The new Discovery Sport replaces the LR2 and competes with the Audi Q5, BMW X3, Mercedes GLK and Volvo XC60. Land Rover also refreshingly returns to actual names. There are people who will drop the name of the luxury brand they drive, but cannot remember the alphabet-soup name of the model.
The Discovery Sport and Range Rover Evoque are largely built on the same bones, but the Discovery is 9 inches longer. The extra length is given to the rear seats and a generous cargo hold (a sliding rear seat allows extra flexibility). The Discovery’s more traditional roofline won’t accommodate Glen Plake’s mohawk, but the car-pool crowd will welcome the added headroom and two USB ports in back. An optional third row holds small children or adults you despise.
The Ford-sourced 2-liter turbocharged 4-cylinder engine — a legacy of when Ford owned Land Rover — provides 240 horsepower and 251 pound-feet of torque. The fuel economy is rated at 20 city and 26 highway. The 9-speed gearbox has a sport mode and steering wheel paddles for manual cog swaps. While competitors offer front-drive models, Land Rover keeps up appearances with power to all four tires. Its Terrain Response is the Garanimals of off-roading. Select the surface you want to cross (mud and ruts, for example) and the all-wheel-drive system optimizes accordingly.
The Discovery Sport is no poser; 8.3 inches of ground clearance allow it to scamper over moderately tough terrain without flinching. Ford a river nearly two feet deep and stop for lunch in the middle if you like; the doors are watertight. Approach, breakover and departure angles are quite good. Discovery doesn’t crawl over boulders in Jeep Wrangler fashion, but it has more capabilities than most families need.
Most Discovery Sports will live out their lives on pavement, so going from 0 to 60 miles an hour in just under 8 seconds is quick enough. Throttle lag is glacial in standard drive mode, though. Switch to sport mode for cut-and-thrust city skirmishes. The 9-speed aggressively upshifts for best fuel economy. Discovery’s firm ride quality keeps cornering crisp.
Safety tech includes available automatic emergency braking. Land Rover’s lane departure system discreetly warns with steering wheel vibration.
Solid interior materials won’t impress in the manner of top-shelf Range Rovers, but those can be twice the price. The fixed-glass roof option brings the outdoors in. Land Rover’s improved user interface is straightforward, though lethargic at times. The navigation system provides a “breadcrumb trail” for tracing your way back to civilization. There are storage hooks and nooks, including a small hiding spot under a front cup holder.
The Discovery Sport starts at $38,065; the top-shelf HSE Luxury tested costs just over $50,000. For those concerned with reliability, the warranty covers 50,000 miles. Design cues from Evoque are a nice touch, though many passers-by commented that the style did not look enough like a traditional Range Rover. There’s a solution, though: Don’t wash it after a wilderness trek. A muddy Discovery tells the neighbors oh so much.
