Tory Burch will unveil her new stand-alone athleisurewear collection (I know, I know, I hate the word, too, but for want of a better one it seems to have become the fallback term of choice) to the world come New York Fashion Week in September, but on Wednesday, I stopped by her showroom, and she gave me a peek.
First thought? She’s going to make a lot of money off this.
Athleisurewear is, as NPD Group noted in a recent report on the sector, on the way up over all — total men’s and women’s activewear apparel sales in the United States grew “17 percent to $35.4 billion in the 12 months ending June 2015” — and Ms. Burch is one of the first fashion week names to market with a fully fledged concept on how to take advantage of that. Early birds and all that. Worms.
Arguably, Prada was actually the earliest bird of all in this sector, having debuted its Prada Sport line in 1997, but in that case, it might actually have been too early; the line never really broke through. Though it would seem to be primed for a big restart now. The Stella McCartney-Adidas line also paved the way, but it is a collaboration, rather than a wholly fashion-owned line. Ditto Y3 and Adidas.
We’ve been talking a lot about the rise of leggings, or at least Mark Parker, the chief executive of Nike, has, and this is one of the most proactive moves I’ve seen in fashion: Grab a piece of that market, and try to forestall the giant sports brands from using it as a springboard into the fashion sector.
In any case, the line slots almost seamlessly into the whole Tory universe, which could be summed up as “women who live like me, or want to live like me.” Perhaps unsurprisingly, given that Forbes has estimated the value of her “empire” at “upwards of $3 billion,” there are apparently lots of them. From the colors to the shapes, it looks like her runway line, only — well, with lots of wicking properties.
It also has reflectivity, ball pockets (on tennis skirts), compression paneling, extra-opaque Lycra (take that, Lululemon), flat-lock seams, lock-pull zippers and seamless constructions.
Yup, really: This is how we have to talk in fashion now. Gird yourself.
The color palette is primarily white, navy and red, with some orange and burgundy thrown in (Ms. Burch loves a good, 1970s-esque orange). There’s a kind of road-map print on many pieces, as well as a small floral number, and one Indian-like graphic that had an unexpected madeleine effect on me, sending me whooshing back to high school, when the hippest girls wore Indian print T-shirts with their tie-dye. I mentioned this to Ms. Burch.
“Me, too!” she said. “I thought it would be good for yoga.”
There’s something about the adult commercialization of adolescent associations that is a little depressingly calculated, but at the same time, it’s unquestionably effective.
The plan is to offer running, yoga, golf and tennis clothes, the running/yoga stuff doubling as general workout wear (leggings, track pants, jackets, T-shirts, etc.). There are also bags (tennis and otherwise), small leather goods and shoes, including an odd pearl-covered slip-on sneaker that is, Ms. Burch said, “my answer to the luxury sneaker trend.”
Most interesting, however, is a section of the (pretty large) collection devoted to “coming and going.” That means stuff you can wear out of the aerobics/SoulCycle/etc. class and possibly to the office, or at least to lunch, or to drop off your kids at school, without your outfit shrieking, “Gym!”
Given that there is a SoulCycle right across the street from Ms. Burch’s headquarters on West 19th Street in Manhattan, presumably she had a fair amount of time for ad hoc observation. She has been working on the line for two years.
I particularly liked a navy neoprene peacoat with neat shoulders and a slight A-line (it has a matching midi skirt), and a series of light, vintage-y cashmere Coolmax sweaters, which mix traditional fibers with techno ones, for better breathability on the golf course and beyond.
The Sport line, which will have its own packaging, and range from $55 for tops to $550 for coats, will not be sold in regular Tory stores, or alongside her regular line in department stores, but rather, it will be focused almost entirely on e-commerce, with a stand-alone store planned for 20th Street and Fifth Avenue (an old Armani store) to open in March. In the meantime, come September, Tory Sport will have its own pop-up store on Elizabeth Street, where Ms. Burch’s first store once stood.
